Title: GeoDose-CP: Graph-Local Conformal Inference for Continuous-Treatment Earth Observation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.28895v1

Published Time: Fri, 25 Sep 2026 00:30:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
> 1

# GeoDose-CP: Graph-Local Conformal Inference for Continuous-Treatment Earth Observation 

Md Khalid Hasan Sakib, Dristi Datta*, Manoranjan Paul, and Davina White 

Abstract —Reliable intervention-oriented uncertainty quantifi-cation from Earth observation (EO) remains difficult when continuous treatment shift, spatial dependence, limited support, and satellite-outcome uncertainty must be addressed simul-taneously. Existing causal, conformal, and spatial approaches address components of this problem, but their direct combination does not generally recover the correct interventional reference law because candidate reassignment jointly alters treatment likelihood, standardized residuals, and graph-dependent residual likelihood. This study presents GeoDose-CP, a support-aware conformal framework for localized stochastic potential outcomes under continuous or mixed continuous–atomic treatment. Its central methodological contribution is a graph-local target-orbit law that jointly represents intervention-induced treatment shift, the inverse outcome-scale Jacobian, and spatial residual dependence, together with exact weighted candidate inversion, a scalable sparse approximation with explicit discrepancy ac-counting, and refusal under inadequate support. Evaluation used controlled known-truth experiments, MineDoseBench, treatment-density sensitivity analysis, external conformal comparators, and a multi-mine New South Wales (NSW) study. In MineDoseBench, GeoDose-CP achieved mean selective coverage of 0.9692 across 27 configurations and a minimum local q0.05 of 0.8951; exact–sparse auditing produced nine inclusion disagreements over 2,700 tar-gets. In the NSW study, the absence of an auditable longitudinal rehabilitation treatment rendered treatment-dependent inference nonoperational rather than forcing inference through a proxy exposure. 

Index Terms —Conformal prediction, continuous treatment, Earth observation, spatial dependence, uncertainty quantifica-tion. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Earth observation (EO) increasingly supports environmen-tal management and restoration assessment at spatial scales where controlled field experiments are difficult or infeasible. Repeated satellite observations provide spatially continuous measurements of land-surface change from regional to global scales [1], [2], creating opportunities to move beyond descrip-tive mapping toward inference on outcomes under specified 

Md Khalid Hasan Sakib is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Uttara University, Dhaka, Bangladesh (e-mail: 2261101010@ut-tara.ac.bd). Dristi Datta is with the School of Computing, Mathematics and En-gineering, Charles Sturt University, Bathurst, NSW 2795, Australia, and also with Australian Integrated Carbon (AiCarbon), Level 4, 191 Pul-teney Street, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia (e-mail: ddatta@csu.edu.au; dristi.datta@aicarbon.com). Corresponding author: Dristi Datta. Manoranjan Paul is with the School of Computing, Mathematics and Engineering, Charles Sturt University, Bathurst, NSW 2795, Australia (e-mail: mpaul@csu.edu.au). Davina White is with Australian Integrated Carbon (AiCarbon), Level 4, 191 Pulteney Street, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia (e-mail: davina.white@aicarbon.com). 

interventions. This distinction is particularly important in mine rehabilitation, where satellite time series quantify disturbance and vegetation recovery [3]–[6], but observed recovery does not identify what would have occurred under a different re-habilitation intensity. Intervention-oriented EO inference must therefore address non-random treatment assignment, continu-ous and spatially heterogeneous treatment support, spatial de-pendence, geographic deployment, and uncertainty in satellite-derived outcomes. EO research has developed powerful methods for spatial prediction and validation. Gaussian-process models, machine learning, and Earth-system learning represent complex non-linear and spatial structure [2], [7], [8], while geographically separated validation is increasingly recommended for spatial deployment [9]–[11]. Such validation can reveal substantially weaker generalization than random partitioning [12], and predictor selection and transferability can depend strongly on deployment geography [13], [14]. These advances strengthen geographic prediction, but their target generally remains an outcome under the observed data-generating regime rather than a potential outcome under a specified intervention. Causal inference addresses the intervention problem directly. Generalized propensity-score methods extended treatment-effect analysis to continuous treatment regimes [15], [16], followed by doubly robust, balancing, and locally ad-justed dose–response estimators [17]–[19]. These methods support causal reasoning across a treatment continuum, but estimating a dose–response function does not itself provide a conformal prediction set for a supported potential outcome or determine how treatment transport should interact with spatially dependent calibration. Conformal prediction addresses uncertainty from a comple-mentary direction. Classical methods provide distribution-free predictive coverage under exchangeability [20]–[23], with later extensions to counterfactual outcomes [24], [25], continuous-treatment causal and dose–response inference [26], [27], nonexchangeable data [28], [29], localized calibration [30], [31], and covariate or distribution shift [32]–[35]. Model-free spatial conformal prediction has also been developed for geographically dependent observations [36]. These develop-ments address important parts of the EO problem, but they do not compose automatically: localization does not define an interventional target law, distribution-shift weighting does not encode graph-dependent residual reassignment, and spatial conformal calibration does not identify a continuous-treatment potential outcome. The unresolved EO problem is therefore conformal potential-outcome inference when intervention-induced treat-arXiv:2609.28895v1 [stat.AP] 24 Sep 2026 2

ment shift and spatially dependent calibration act jointly . Un-der candidate reassignment, both the observational treatment likelihood and graph-residual likelihood change, so the target reassignment probability cannot in general be constructed by multiplying independent treatment and spatial weights. The required object is a joint graph-local target law .We address this gap with GeoDose-CP , a support-aware conformal framework for localized stochastic potential out-comes under continuous or mixed continuous–atomic treat-ment. Its central methodological contribution is the graph-local target-orbit law (G2), which jointly represents treatment shift, the inverse outcome-scale Jacobian, and graph-dependent residual likelihood. GeoDose-CP connects this law to exact candidate inversion, a scalable sparse approximation with explicit discrepancy accounting, and refusal when treatment or spatial support is inadequate. Causal identification and conformal validity remain separate requirements. The principal contributions are:  

> •

Graph-local target law: a supported localized stochas-tic potential outcome and its corresponding graph-local target-orbit law are derived for continuous or mixed continuous–atomic treatment, establishing why indepen-dent treatment–spatial factorization is not valid in general.  

> •

Exact, scalable, and support-aware inference: the joint target law is coupled with exact weighted candidate inversion, a target-weighted sparse approximation, and explicit refusal when treatment support, endpoint support, graph connectivity, local calibration information, or the applicable certification requirement is inadequate.  

> •

Known-truth and practical evaluation: controlled ex-periments and MineDoseBench evaluate selective and lo-cal coverage, treatment and target-population shift, spatial dependence, measurement error, endpoint support, non-Gaussian dependence, change of spatial support, exact– sparse approximation, refusal, and coverage-matched ef-ficiency. Secondary analyses examine treatment-density estimation and compare GeoDose-CP with adapted continuous-treatment, distribution-shift, and spatial/local conformal families.  

> •

Real EO applicability: a multi-mine New South Wales (NSW) study evaluates geographically buffered valida-tion, EO-product quality, change of spatial support, and site/model heterogeneity. Because the public archive does not provide an authentic longitudinal rehabilitation treat-ment, treatment-dependent inference remains nonopera-tional rather than being forced through a proxy exposure. The evidence is intentionally complementary. Controlled experiments and MineDoseBench provide known-truth eval-uation of the complete treatment–spatial architecture, whereas the NSW study tests whether real EO data provide the treat-ment provenance, spatial support, and product quality required for scientifically defensible inference. This separation evalu-ates both inferential performance and whether an intervention query is scientifically supportable. The remainder of the paper develops the methodology (Section II), describes the evaluation design (Section III), re-ports the results (Section IV), discusses their implications and limitations (Section V), and concludes the study (Section VI). II. G EO DOSE -CP: P ROBLEM FORMULATION AND 

METHOD 

Figure 1 summarizes GeoDose-CP from supported interven-tion specification to graph-local reference-law construction, exact or scalable conformal inference, and support-aware prediction or refusal. The notation follows the methodological hierarchy developed below: G1 is the finite-orbit conditional law, G2 the graph-local target-orbit law, G3 exact weighted candidate inversion, N2 the sparse graph approximation, and N3 the practical coverage-transfer layer. Conditions C1–C5 define the causal-identification requirements. 

A. Supported Continuous-Dose Target and Identification 

Consider spatial units i ∈ V connected by a prespecified graph G = ( V, E). For each unit, Ui denotes pretreatment information, Ai ∈ A a continuous or mixed continuous– atomic treatment, and Yi the observed outcome. The graph encodes statistical spatial dependence for inference and does not itself imply causal interference [36]–[38]. GeoDose-CP targets a supported localized stochastic inter-vention around a scientifically specified dose a0, rather than an unrestricted deterministic potential outcome Y (a0). Let ν

be a dominating treatment measure containing Lebesgue mass on the continuous interior of A and point masses only at genuine observational atoms. Both the observational treatment law g(a | u) and intervention law qh(a | u; a0) are defined with respect to this common mixed measure ν [15]–[17]. For a nonnegative localization kernel κh with bandwidth 

h > 0,

qh(a | u; a0) = κh(a, a 0, u )

Z

> A

κh(s, a 0, u ) dν (s)

. (1) The intervention is normalized with respect to the full mixed dominating measure ν. In the implemented analyses, its continuous component uses Gaussian localization around a0

on the supported interior (0 , 1) , whereas exact endpoint queries can place mass only on genuine audited observational atoms. Continuous treatment mass is never converted into artificial endpoint mass. The intervention is restricted to observational support: 

qh(a | u; a0) > 0 =⇒ g(a | u) > 0. (2) Because (2) is defined on the mixed measure ν, an endpoint is inferentially available only when it is a genuine obser-vational atom; unsupported endpoints cannot be justified by nearby continuous support. Let Π⋆ denote the intended deployment distribution and 

χ(u, G) ∈ { 0, 1} an eligibility indicator determined from pre-treatment support, spatial design, and EO-quality information. Assuming positive eligible mass, 

dΠsupp (u) = χ(u, G) dΠ⋆(u)

Z

χ(v, G) dΠ⋆(v)

. (3) 3  

> Fig. 1. Operational workflow of GeoDose-CP. Spatial graph and EO data, together with frozen nuisance models and the supported-intervention conditions C1–C5, define the inputs to candidate evaluation. For each candidate response, G1 constructs the local candidate orbit and G2 evaluates the joint target-orbit law through the treatment likelihood, inverse-scale Jacobian, and graph-residual likelihood. Inference then proceeds through exact weighted inference (G3) or the sparse approximation (N2), followed by weighted p-value calculation and candidate inversion. Support and numerical checks, together with the applicable N3 assessment for the sparse route, determine whether the query returns a prediction set with diagnostics or an explicit refusal.

When transport from the observational population is re-quired, assume Πsupp ≪ Πobs on the inferential support and define 

r(u) = dΠsupp 

dΠobs 

(u). (4) The target-design ratio r(u) transports between populations and is distinct from the treatment/intervention ratio qh/g [25], [32], [33]. The supported target query is 

U † ∼ Πsupp , A† ∼ qh(· | U †; a0), Y † = Y †(A†).

(5) Let P0 denote the resulting supported-target law and E0

expectation under P0. Identification requires: C1 consistency, 

Yi = Yi(Ai); C2 supported conditional ignorability, Yi(a) ⊥

Ai | Ui for Πsupp -almost every u and qh(· | u; a0)-almost every supported a; C3 positivity as in (2); C4 no material interference for the primary estimand; and C5 stability of the relevant conditional outcome law between observational and target regimes [17], [39], [40]. Under C1–C5, for any integrable ϕ,

E0

ϕ(Y †) = Eobs 



r(U ) qh(A | U ; a0)

g(A | U ) ϕ(Y )



. (6) Equation (6) identifies the supported stochastic target law but does not establish conformal coverage. Causal identifica-tion and conformal validity are therefore separate requirements [24], [25]. 

B. Residual Representation and Failure of Naive Factorization 

Outcome nuisance functions are estimated from designated nuisance-training data and held fixed during calibration. Let 

bm(u, a ) and bσ(u, a ) > 0 denote the fitted location and scale functions [22], [23]. The standardized residual and primary two-sided nonconformity score are 

Ei = Yi − bm(Ui, A i)

bσ(Ui, A i) , Si = |Ei|. (7) The spatial dependence of E = ( Ei : i ∈ V ) is statistical and remains distinct from the causal-interference condition C4 [36], [39]. Suppose wdose and wspatial are constructed separately to account for treatment shift and spatial calibration. A seemingly natural combination is 

wnaive ∝ wdose wspatial . (8) This factorization is not valid in general. Reassigning a treatment–outcome payload changes the observational treat-ment likelihood, its standardized residual through (7), and the graph-dependent residual likelihood simultaneously. The probability of a candidate reassignment must therefore be evaluated under their joint law, rather than reconstructed from independently derived marginal weights. Product factorization is recovered only under additional structure that separates the treatment and spatial contributions compatibly. Such reductions are useful special cases, but good empirical performance of a product-form procedure does not establish it as the correct reference law. More generally, separate treatment and spatial marginals are insufficient to recover the target–calibration coupling without the required graph-local dependence structure. This motivates the joint graph-local target-orbit law derived next. 

C. Exact Graph-Local Target-Orbit Law 1) Finite Local Orbit: For target slot t, define the graph-local block 4

B = {b1, . . . , b mB , t }, (9) where mB is the number of calibration slots. Slot-specific pretreatment information, graph locations, and design quan-tities remain fixed, while treatment–outcome payloads are reassigned within B.For candidate response y, the target outcome is first replaced by y, after which permutations producing identical physical states are quotiented. Let Ωy denote the resulting set of distinct orbit states. Let IB denote the complete finite-orbit conditioning information comprising the fixed slot and design information, payloads outside B, and the unordered multiset of movable payloads within B.

Lemma 1 (Finite-Orbit Conditional Law (G1)): Assume the block payload law admits a density with respect to a product dominating measure invariant under permutations of the block coordinates. Conditional on IB , the probability of each distinct state π ∈ Ωy is proportional to its joint reference-law density. Duplicate physical states are represented once; their stabilizer multiplicities cancel after normalization. Thus, conditional inference reduces to comparison over a finite set of distinct graph-local payload assignments. 

2) Graph-Local Target Law: For π ∈ Ωy , let 

(Aπ(i), Y π(i)(y)) denote the payload assigned to slot i and define 

Eπi (y) = Yπ(i)(y) − bm Ui, A π(i)

bσ Ui, A π(i)

 . (10) Let C denote the residual-graph clique collection and ψC

the potential associated with clique C.

Theorem 1 (Graph-Local Target-Orbit Law (G2)): Assume the supported mixed-measure treatment law of Section II-A, with treatment densities defined with respect to the common mixed measure ν, a slot-factorized observational treatment law, and a positive standardized-residual density that, conditional on the frozen pretreatment and design information, is invariant to treatment after the specified location–scale transformation and factorizes over the prespecified graph. Conditional on IB ,the target weight of π ∈ Ωy satisfies 

Wπ (y) ∝ qh

 Aπ(t) | Ut; a0

 Y

> i∈B\{ t}

g Aπ(i) | Ui



× Y

> i∈B

1

bσ Ui, A π(i)

 Y 

> C∈C :
> C∩B̸=∅

ψC (EπC (y)) . (11) Residual factors supported entirely outside B are orbit-invariant and cancel after normalization; hence only the moved block and its incident graph boundary contribute to the spatial term. Equation (11) is the central GeoDose-CP reference law. It couples three quantities that generally cannot be constructed independently: the intervention/observational treatment likeli-hood, the inverse outcome-scale Jacobian, and the graph-local residual likelihood. The Jacobian arises from the transforma-tion Y 7 → E in (10) and is required whenever bσ changes across orbit states. The target-design factor r(Ut) is constant within the con-ditioned orbit and therefore cancels from normalized orbit probabilities, although it remains relevant for target-population transport and scalable coverage accounting. Likewise, the ex-act treatment term requires g(A | U ), or a theorem-equivalent joint assignment likelihood; a target-versus-observational clas-sifier estimates a different density ratio and cannot replace g

in the exact target-orbit law. Dependent treatment assignment would instead require the corresponding joint assignment likelihood. 

Proof sketch: By Lemma 1, each distinct orbit state is weighted by its joint reference-law density. Re-expressing moved out-comes as standardized residuals contributes the inverse-scale Jacobian, while graph factorization expresses the residual density through clique potentials. Factors unaffected by the reassignment cancel after normalization, leaving exactly the treatment, Jacobian, and boundary-touching graph terms in (11). Complete proofs of G1–G3 are provided in Supplemen-tary Appendix A. 

3) Gaussian Markov Specialization: For a proper Gaussian Markov random field with sparse precision matrix Q, partition the residual vector into the moved block B and its required external boundary D. Up to orbit-invariant terms, 

log Lπ 

> G

(y) = − 12 (EπB (y)) T QBB EπB (y)−(EπB (y)) T QBD ED .

(12) The Gaussian normalizing term is orbit-invariant and there-fore cancels. Only sparse operations involving B and its boundary are required, so inversion of the full spatial covari-ance matrix is unnecessary. Equation (12) is a computational specialization of Theorem 1; the G2 result itself is non-Gaussian and requires only the stated positive graph-factorized residual law. 

D. Exact Candidate Inversion and Scalable Coverage 1) Exact Weighted Candidate Inversion: Let Wπ (y) be the unnormalized target-orbit weight in (11). Define 

W π (y) = Wπ (y)

X

> π′∈Ωy

Wπ′ (y) . (13) Let Tπ (y) denote the target-slot nonconformity score under state π, with the primary score induced by (7), and let πobs 

denote the realized assignment. The weighted upper-tail p-value is 

py = X

> π∈Ωy

W π (y)1 {Tπ (y) ≥ Tπobs (y)} . (14) Including structural ties in the upper tail gives, under the exact target-orbit law, 

Pr  

> 0

{pY † ≤ α | I B } ≤ α, (15) where IB is the finite-orbit conditioning information defined in Section II-C. Candidate inversion yields 5

bCα = {y ∈ Y : py > α } . (16) The raw set may be disconnected; all components are retained. Any convex hull shown for visualization is presentation-only and does not replace the set in (16). Equations (14)–(16) define G3. Once the correct target-orbit reference law is established, candidate inversion follows gen-eralized conformal validity machinery; the GeoDose-specific structural contribution is therefore G2 in Theorem 1 [41], [42]. 

2) Sparse Graph Approximation: Exact orbit evaluation is feasible for small local blocks. For larger domains, GeoDose-CP uses a Vecchia-type sparse conditional approximation [43]. Under a deterministic ordering, let Pi be the full predecessor set of residual Ei and Ni ⊆ Pi the retained neighborhood: 

p(E) = Y

> i

p(Ei | EPi ), q(E) = Y

> i

p(Ei | ENi ). (17) The information omitted by truncation is 

DKL (p∥q) = X

> i

I  Ei; EPi\Ni | ENi

 . (18) Let L(U ) denote the corresponding target-local information loss. Assuming finite target-weighted information, 

Eobs [r(U )L(U )] = EΠsupp [L(U )] < ∞, (19) and define 

∆sp = EΠsupp [L(U )] = Eobs [r(U )L(U )] . (20) Pinsker’s inequality then gives 

δsparse ≤

r ∆sp 

2 . (21) This target-weighted sparse approximation and its associ-ated coverage-transfer step constitute N2. 

3) Practical Marginal Coverage: The implemented refer-ence law may additionally differ from the ideal supported-target law through structural misspecification, nuisance estima-tion, and numerical approximation. Let δmis , δest , and δcomp 

denote valid total-variation bounds for these transitions. KL di-vergence controls the sparse approximation through Pinsker’s inequality; subsequent law discrepancies are combined on the total-variation scale. The resulting law ladder is 

P0 −→ Psparse −→ Pstruct −→ Pfit −→ Pcomp , (22) with each discrepancy charged once. If the joint nui-sance/certificate good event fails with probability at most η,then 

Pr 

> 0

n

Y † ∈ bCα

o

≥ 1 − α − δsparse − δmis 

− δest − δcomp − η. 

(23) Equation (23) defines N3 and is a marginal coverage-transfer statement. We use the term N3 certificate only when the displayed discrepancy bounds and good-event probability are formally established. When fitted treatment, outcome, spatial, or computational components lack the corresponding finite-sample controls, the resulting N3 quantities are reported as empirical diagnostics rather than theorem-certified coverage guarantees. Conditional coverage would require corresponding conditional total-variation control [44]. For the exact route, 

δsparse = 0 ; for the scalable route it is controlled by (20)– (21). 

E. Support-Aware Refusal 

GeoDose-CP returns either a supported prediction set or an explicit refusal when the required target law cannot be justified. Applicable gates assess intervention positivity, genuine endpoint support, effective-sample-size and weight-concentration diagnostics, graph-safe calibration support, con-nected local geometry, EO-quality eligibility, and nonvacuity of the applicable N3 certificate or prespecified empirical diagnostic criterion. Accordingly, GeoDose-CP output ∈

n bCα, refusal 

o

. (24) Refusal is an inferential outcome rather than missing data or noncoverage. Unsupported treatment values are not extrapo-lated, unsupported endpoint atoms are not created from nearby continuous mass, and treatment-dependent queries are not constructed when the scientifically required treatment variable is unavailable. Effective sample size, weight concentration, graph support, and endpoint checks remain operational sup-port diagnostics rather than general coverage guarantees. The method-specific operating thresholds used in evaluation are reported in Section III. 

F. GeoDose-CP Inference Algorithm 

Let F collect the fitted nuisance models, graph, calibration data, support rules, intervention specification, numerical set-tings, and prespecified inferential route used for a query. For scalable inference, F also records whether the applicable N3 assessment is a formally established certificate or a prespeci-fied empirical diagnostic. Algorithm 1 summarizes GeoDose-CP inference. Algorithm 1 does not require a particular outcome-prediction architecture once the fitted location and scale func-tions are learned from the designated nuisance-training data and held fixed during calibration. In the empirical analyses, RF/XGBoost outcome models and fitted treatment and spatial nuisance models instantiate these components. Their associ-ated N3 quantities are interpreted as empirical diagnostics unless the finite-sample discrepancy controls required by (23) are separately established. III. D ATA AND EVALUATION DESIGN 

A. Evidence Architecture and Data Substrate 

The evaluation uses three complementary evidence layers: controlled experiments test the inferential mechanism under 6

Algorithm 1 GeoDose-CP Query Inference                                                                      

> Require: Target t, dose a0, level α, domain Y, and query objects F
> 1: if an applicable eligibility or graph-support gate fails then
> 2: return REFUSE
> 3: end if
> 4: Construct qh(· | Ut;a0)and local block Bt
> 5: if an applicable positivity, endpoint, or operating-support gate fails then
> 6: return REFUSE
> 7: end if
> 8: for each candidate yin the prespecified inversion routine do
> 9: Replace the target response by y, then construct Ωy
> 10: Compute candidate residuals using (10) 11: if exact route then
> 12: Evaluate target-orbit weights using (11) 13: else
> 14: Evaluate the N2 sparse approximation 15: end if
> 16: Normalize weights and compute pyusing (14) 17: end for
> 18: if a required numerical or computational check fails then
> 19: return REFUSE
> 20: end if
> 21: Construct bCα={y∈ Y :py> α }
> 22: if sparse route then
> 23: Assess the applicable N3 certificate or empirical diagnostic 24: if the prespecified N3 operating criterion fails or is vacuous then
> 25: return REFUSE
> 26: end if
> 27: end if
> 28: return bCα, support diagnostics, and N3 status

known treatment, counterfactual, and spatial laws; Mine-DoseBench combines real mine geometry and pretreatment environmental context with generated counterfactual truth; and the New South Wales (NSW) study examines real EO applica-bility where counterfactual truth is unavailable. Together, they address controlled validity, realistic known-truth performance, and real-data applicability. A common spatial substrate was constructed for Bulga Complex, Hunter Valley Operations, Liddell Coal, Mt Arthur Coal, and Mount Thorley Warkworth Complex from the NSW mine-rehabilitation archive [45]. Rehabilitation and distur-bance polygons defined the analysis footprint but were not treated as the longitudinal rehabilitation exposure required by the causal estimand. A globally anchored 90 m × 90 m lattice in EPSG:9473 retained cells with at least 70% supported area; queen contiguity yielded 27,042 cells and 102,893 undirected within-mine graph edges. EO variables were derived from Digital Earth Australia (DEA) Landsat Fractional Cover Collection 3 and DEA Wa-ter Observations [46], [47]. Photosynthetic vegetation (PV), unmixing error (UE), and water status were extracted for 2023–2025. Acquisitions required at least 70% valid and dry supported pixels, were composited by annual pixel median, and were summarized within cells by spatial median. Annual eligibility required at least three accepted observations, at least 70% valid composite pixels, finite PV and UE, water fraction ≤ 0.50 , and no more than 50% of valid pixels with UE ≥ 25 . The resulting archive contains 81,126 block–year records, with 23,610 cells satisfying the complete three-year EO-quality criteria. Mt Arthur Coal, Hunter Valley Operations, and Bulga Complex were selected for the real-data study using this quality screen without reference to PV level or PV change. MineDoseBench adds 13 pretreatment environmental vari-ables: four climate, five soil, and four terrain attributes. Climate variables comprise annual rainfall and short-crop evapotranspiration for 2023 and 2024 from SILO [48], [49]. Soil variables comprise topsoil organic carbon, CaCl 2 pH, clay fraction, bulk density, and available volumetric water capacity [50]–[54]. Terrain variables comprise elevation, slope, aspect, and surface roughness derived from Australian SRTM elevation products [55]. Raster quantities were aggregated by polygon area weighting, and bulk density used the authoritative Release-2 unit of g cm −3 [53]. Environmental-context completeness was assessed indepen-dently of EO eligibility. Of 23,710 benchmark cells requiring context information, the prespecified 0.99 valid-area criterion retained 23,618 and excluded 92, with no missing-value im-putation. The 23,618 context-complete cells and 23,610 three-year EO-quality cells therefore represent distinct eligibility screens. Environmental context and pretreatment EO/history vari-ables formed 26 permitted MineDoseBench nuisance predic-tors. Outcome-year and outcome-derived variables, oracle or hidden states, sample-role indicators, and mapped rehabilita-tion variables were excluded. Nuisance training, support con-struction, calibration, and final testing were spatially separated, with scenario definitions, targets, and operating rules specified before performance evaluation. 

B. Controlled Validation and MineDoseBench 

Controlled known-truth experiments first isolate the infer-ential mechanism before introducing realistic mine geometry and environmental heterogeneity. The suite comprises 3,000 primary replications, 600 fixed-resolution increasing-domain evaluations, and 590 stress evaluations, totaling 4,190 case replications and 52,740 scientific queries. Conditions vary treatment and target-population shift, spatial dependence, over-lap, residual structure, graph information, measurement error, endpoint support, and calibration information. The increasing-domain experiment uses 17 ×17 , 25 ×25 , and 

35 ×35 lattices at fixed 90-m resolution, varying spatial extent rather than analytical support. Candidate inversion is restricted to the numerical domain [−8, 8] , which is a computational range rather than a physical fractional-cover domain. MineDoseBench provides the primary realistic known-truth evaluation. It retains NSW mine geometry, graph structure, pretreatment EO history, and environmental context while generating treatment, potential outcomes, spatial residual de-pendence, and target-population shift under an auditable data-generating process. The benchmark response is fractional-cover change on the physical domain 

YMDB = [ −1, 1] , (25) with truth generated directly within this range rather than imposed by post-hoc clipping. MineDoseBench is constructed around the joint treatment– spatial problem: mixed continuous–atomic treatment with gen-uine endpoint atoms, nonlinear dose response and effect modi-fication, graph-dependent residual variation, and independently 7

controlled target-population shift. Baseline configurations sat-isfy the stated identification and reference-law conditions, whereas stress configurations perturb overlap, treatment and endpoint support, spatial and residual structure, calibration information, measurement quality, and analytical support. Hid-den spatial confounding is included solely as a negative control and does not satisfy the conditional-ignorability requirement for causal interpretation. The treatment mechanism is known by construction in the controlled experiments. In the registered MineDoseBench RF-primary pipeline, however, the observational treatment law 

g(A | U ) is estimated from designated nuisance-training data using the frozen mixed-propensity model bg(A | U ). The known MineDoseBench treatment law is retained only for the separate treatment-density sensitivity analysis in Section III-D, where oracle, estimated, and deliberately misspecified treat-ment models are compared while the remaining pipeline components are held fixed. This separation allows structural behavior to be examined under known treatment mechanisms while evaluating the primary realistic benchmark with a fitted treatment model. MineDoseBench contains 27 configurations with 20 inde-pendent replications each (540 tasks) and five ranked target cells in each of five mines per configuration and replication, yielding 13,500 primary target identities. Change of spatial support is evaluated on an independently anchored 180-m substrate containing 7,295 cells, of which 5,788 satisfy the eligibility criteria; retained 180-m cells require the corre-sponding available 90-m children to be eligible. Additional configurations assess non-Gaussian dependence, measurement error, reduced information, endpoint support, combined per-turbations, and cross-mine transfer. The three-year temporal fixture is used only as a structural stress test and is not interpreted as evidence of temporal-conformal validity. 

C. Methods, Operating Rules, and Evaluation Metrics 

The primary MineDoseBench comparison comprises five mechanism-aligned procedures: dose-only weighted conformal prediction (M2), spatial-only residual calibration (M3), naive treatment–spatial factorization (M4), the treatment-weighted graph-safe baseline (M5), and full GeoDose-CP (M6). M5 is a deterministic target-separated graph-safe weighted conformal procedure using treatment weights on a pre-outcome eligible graph-safe calibration subset. Ordinary split conformal predic-tion (M1) is retained where informative but is not part of the primary M2–M6 comparison. The spatial comparator M3-CRE reassigns standardized residual payloads E while holding treatment A, pretreatment information U , and graph slots fixed, thereby isolating spa-tial recalibration without treatment transport. M4 multiplies the M2 treatment marginal by the corresponding M3 spa-tial marginal and normalizes once, providing the deliberately factorized comparator to the joint graph-local construction in M6. Thus, M2–M6 separate treatment shift, spatial recalibra-tion, naive factorization, graph-safe weighted calibration, and the joint treatment–spatial target law. Published continuous-treatment, distribution-shift, and spatial/local conformal fami-lies are evaluated separately below. Random forest (RF) is the primary nuisance-model track across all 27 configurations. XGBoost is a prespecified con-firmation track restricted to the S1/S4/S5/S8 subset and is not treated as a second complete benchmark analysis. For treatment-dependent procedures in the RF-primary benchmark, the observational treatment law is the fitted mixed-propensity model bg(A | U ) described in Section III-B; the known oracle law is used only in the separate treatment-density sensitivity analysis. The inferential level and localization bandwidth are 

α = 0 .10 , h = 0 .10 . (26) The common numerical operating thresholds are 

ESS ≥ 3, max  

> i

wi ≤ 0.50 , nGS ≥ 20 , (27) where wi is the applicable normalized operating weight and nGS is the graph-safe calibration-support count. These thresholds were selected in a separate 20-replication pilot and frozen before the independent controlled-production and MineDoseBench evaluations; production outcomes were not used to retune them. They are method-specific stability di-agnostics rather than universal coverage conditions. M2 uses treatment-weight ESS and maximum-weight conditions; M3 uses graph-safe support without treatment-weight refusal; M4 and M5 apply their applicable weight and graph-support conditions; and M6 combines the applicable weight and graph-support gates with a finite, positive N3 operating require-ment. Positivity, endpoint, structural-support, and computa-tional checks are likewise applied only where defined. ESS and weight concentration therefore diagnose support and stability rather than establish coverage or treatment-model correctness by themselves. The primary scalable M6 route uses the prospectively frozen sparse neighborhood size m = 64 ; additional neighborhood-size sensitivity is reported in the Supplement. RF/XGBoost outcome models and fitted treatment and spatial nuisance models provide practical implementations. In the primary MineDoseBench implementation, the standardized outcome-residual transformation uses bσ(U, A ) ≡ 1; consequently, the inverse-scale Jacobian in the G2 reference law is retained structurally but equals one numerically in this benchmark. The spatial residual model retains its separately fitted dispersion parameter. Associated N3 quantities are interpreted as empir-ical diagnostics unless the finite-sample discrepancy controls required by (23) are separately established. The exact–sparse audit uses size-6 local blocks containing one target and five distinct calibration slots. It contains 2,700 target identities and 8,100 method–target combinations across M3, M4, and M6; evaluating each under both the full-graph exact reference and the sparse m = 64 reference yields 16,200 audit rows. Full finite-domain inversion uses 50 target identi-ties spanning ρ ∈ { 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8}, with 10 identities per dependence level. Evaluation across M3, M4, and M6 gives 150 full-inversion records. For the corresponding efficiency-only comparison, M2 and M5 contribute their closed-form returned intervals on the same registered target identities, intersected with the benchmark response domain YMDB =8

[−1, 1] . The resulting width comparisons therefore constitute a targeted structural-efficiency audit rather than population-level efficiency evidence. For query q, let Rq = 1 indicate a returned prediction set and Rq = 0 a refusal. Selective coverage and return rate are 

dCov sel =

PQq=1 Rq 1

n

Y † 

> q

∈ bCq

oPQq=1 Rq

, br = 1

Q

> Q

X

> q=1

Rq . (28) Refusals are reported separately and are not recoded as noncoverage. Evaluation focuses on selective coverage, re-turn/refusal, target-local coverage, coverage-matched width, exact–sparse discrepancy, endpoint behavior, and false-support behavior, where false support denotes returned inference under a known benchmark support failure. For each prespecified local reporting stratum, selective coverage is computed among returned queries using the same convention as above; strata with no returned sets have undefined selective coverage and remain represented through return/refusal rather than being treated as coverage failures. Local robustness is summarized by q0.05 , the fifth percentile of the selective-coverage values across the prespecified mine and spatial-rank cells. Dose-bin summaries are retained separately and are not included in 

q0.05 . This quantity is a lower-tail diagnostic for concentrated local failure and is not interpreted as exact conditional cover-age [30], [31], [44]. Configuration-level coverage uncertainty is summarized by 95% cluster-bootstrap intervals using replication-by-mine clus-ters as the resampling units. Thus, the five target queries within a given replication–mine cluster are kept together rather than treated as independent bootstrap units. The lower endpoint of the resulting interval is used as the reported configuration-level bootstrap lower bound. The controlled study additionally evaluates 17 prespecified lower-tail coverage groups using Bonferroni-adjusted undercoverage tests. Prediction-set width is interpreted as an efficiency compar-ison only when 

dCov sel ,j − dCov sel ,k ≤ 0.03 . (29) Accordingly, a narrower procedure is credited as more efficient only under comparable selective coverage; coverage, refusal, and sharpness remain separate performance dimen-sions. 

D. Treatment-Density Sensitivity and External Comparator Evaluation 

Two secondary analyses examine treatment-law specifica-tion and external conformal comparators without altering the registered 27-configuration MineDoseBench evaluation. Treatment-density sensitivity is assessed within the RF-primary M6 pipeline using 

GORACLE , GESTIMATED , GMISSPECIFIED . (30) 

GORACLE uses the known mixed continuous–atomic treat-ment law from the MineDoseBench data-generating process. 

GESTIMATED uses the primary fitted propensity law bg(A |

U ), estimated exclusively from nuisance-training data: end-point/interior mass is modeled by multinomial logistic regres-sion, while the interior conditional law uses a ridge-logit mean with a global beta concentration parameter. GMISSPECIFIED 

deliberately removes dependence on U through a marginal mixed-treatment model. The analysis spans seven mechanism-based configurations: baseline, treatment shift, strong spatial dependence ( ρ = 0 .6), strong dependence with target-design shift, poor overlap, severe-tail support stress, and mixed endpoint atoms. All 20 replications and common target identities are retained. The RF outcome nuisance, spatial nuisance, graph, calibration data, intervention specification, support thresholds, α = 0 .10 , and scalable inference route are held fixed, so the comparison iso-lates treatment-law specification rather than changes elsewhere in the pipeline. GeoDose-CP is also compared on a selected seven-configuration MineDoseBench subset, wherever native ap-plicability permits, with three adapted conformal families. E1 represents continuous-treatment conformal inference [26], [27]; E2 represents weighted distribution-shift conformal infer-ence combining treatment/intervention and target-population reweighting without graph-dependent residual reassignment [25], [32], [33]; and E3 represents spatial/local conformal calibration without treatment-shift correction [30], [31], [36]. The RF-primary M6 implementation serves as the GeoDose-CP reference. Each comparator is evaluated under its native support conditions rather than being forced to reproduce GeoDose-CP operating rules. In the implemented comparison, E1 is natively nonapplicable when the queried target dose is an exact treatment atom under its continuous-treatment formu-lation; such cases are treated as nonapplicability rather than refusal. E2 and M6 operate on the mixed treatment measure, whereas E3 is treatment-agnostic. None of E1–E3 implements the candidate-specific joint treatment–spatial target law of Theorem 1. They are therefore mechanism-aligned adaptations of published method families rather than byte-for-byte repro-ductions of authors’ software. Their exact scores, weighting rules, localization, treatment-density specifications, support conditions, calibration procedures, hyperparameters, and set construction are reported in the Supplement, together with a strict all-method common-subset comparison. 

E. Real NSW Earth-Observation Demonstration 

The NSW study evaluates real-world EO applicability rather than causal performance of the full treatment-dependent GeoDose-CP pipeline. Three mines—Mt Arthur Coal, Hunter Valley Operations, and Bulga Complex—were selected at the primary 90-m support using outcome-blind EO-quality criteria, with an independently anchored 180-m analysis for change-of-support sensitivity. Random forest (RF) is the primary prediction track and XGBoost the confirmation track. Across both spatial supports and predictor tracks, the study comprises 41,244 method–query records. The response is annual change in the observed Digital Earth Australia photosynthetic-vegetation product, 9

Y EO  

> i

= P V i, 2025 − P V i, 2024 

100 . (31) This quantity represents observed satellite-product green fractional-cover change rather than an error-free latent mea-sure of ecological recovery [56]–[58]. Predictors comprise 27 pretreatment EO and environmental variables plus three mine indicators. All 2025 predictors, outcome-derived quantities, mapped rehabilitation fraction, oracle or hidden variables, sample-role indicators, and spatial-axis coordinates are ex-cluded. A treatment-authenticity audit established that the public NSW archive contains rehabilitation snapshots but not an auditable longitudinal continuous rehabilitation treatment con-sistent with the target estimand. No proxy exposure was in-troduced. Consequently, treatment-dependent procedures M2, M4, and M6 are nonoperational. The real-data analysis in-stead uses M1, M3, and a treatment-free graph-safe fallback (GS), which calibrates on a deterministic graph-safe subset without treatment-dependent transport. GS is distinct from the treatment-weighted MineDoseBench M5 baseline defined in Section III-C. The NSW study therefore tests treatment-authenticity gating, spatial deployment, EO-product quality, and method applicability rather than causal validation of full M6. Geographically buffered partitioning is the primary valida-tion design. Random splitting is used only for the RF/M1 predictive spatial-leakage diagnostic, leave-one-mine-out anal-ysis as a cross-mine transfer diagnostic, and the 90-to-180-m comparison as a change-of-support sensitivity [9]–[12], [14]. The 180-m substrate is reconstructed independently under the anchored all-available-child eligibility rule rather than by rescaling 90-m predictions, and a UE ≤ 20 analysis provides an additional EO-product-quality sensitivity. For M3, conformity p-values are evaluated over the com-plete eligible real-data frame. Full finite-domain inversion is restricted to an outcome-blind subset of 60 targets for 90-m RF, 30 for 90-m XGBoost, 36 for 180-m RF, and 18 for 180-m XGBoost, totaling 144 inversions. Reported M3 widths therefore characterize this targeted inversion subset, not full-test-frame or population-level efficiency. For the 90-m RF width comparison in Figure 7, M1 and GS are evaluated on this same frozen 60-target subset. The fitted NSW spatial nuisance is empirical and not finite-sample theorem-certified; associated N3 quantities are therefore reported only as diagnostics, not as certified real-data coverage guarantees. IV. R ESULTS 

A. Controlled Validation and Overall MineDoseBench Perfor-mance 

The controlled known-truth experiments first evaluated the inferential mechanism independently of realistic mine geome-try and environmental heterogeneity. Across 4,190 case repli-cations and 52,740 scientific queries, no computational failures occurred. None of the 17 prespecified lower-tail coverage groups showed multiplicity-adjusted evidence of undercover-age. MineDoseBench then evaluated M2–M6 under real mine geometry and pretreatment environmental context while re-taining known counterfactual truth. Table I summarizes the RF-primary results across all 27 configurations. Full GeoDose-CP (M6) attained mean selective coverage of 0.9692; all 27 configuration-level point estimates were at or above the nominal 0.90 level, with a minimum of 0.9140. The 95% replication-by-mine cluster-bootstrap lower bounds were at least 0.90 in 26/27 configurations. The sole exception was S2, for which selective coverage was 0.914 and the lower bound was 0.890. M6 also maintained strong lower-tail local performance. Its mean local q0.05 was 0.9488 and its minimum was 0.8951, the highest minimum among M2–M6. The corresponding minima were 0.8804 for M4, 0.7694 for M5, 0.7464 for M3, and 0.7079 for M2. M3 and M4 were more conservative on average, with mean local q0.05 values of 0.9725 and 0.9574, respectively, showing that strong average coverage did not guarantee equally strong lower-tail local behavior. M4 also achieved high empirical selective coverage, with all 27 configuration-level estimates above 0.90. This result does not establish the factorized M4 construction as the general target reference law because, as shown in Section II-B, product factorization requires additional structural conditions. The comparison therefore distinguishes empirical benchmark performance from the joint-law justification supplied by G2, rather than requiring M6 to numerically dominate every com-parator. Selective coverage is interpreted jointly with return rate because refused queries are reported separately rather than counted as noncoverage. Figure 2 resolves the aggregate results by configuration. Panel (a) shows M6 selective coverage across all 27 config-urations, panel (b) compares local q0.05 across M2–M6, and panel (c) reports the corresponding refusal rates. M6 retains the strongest minimum local q0.05 , while refusal remains limited across most supported configurations and increases as information or support deteriorates. 

B. Spatial Dependence and Coverage-Matched Efficiency 

Across the S4 dependence sequence, M6 selective coverage remained above the nominal 0.90 level throughout, taking values 0.9844, 0.9844, 0.9822, 0.9778, and 0.9733 at ρ = 0 ,0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8, respectively (Fig. 3). Thus, empiri-cal coverage declined only modestly as spatial dependence strengthened. Efficiency showed a different pattern. Under the coverage-matching rule in (29), M6 was 3.8%, 4.9%, and 11.4% narrower than M5 at ρ = 0 , 0.2, and 0.4, respectively, but 31.2% wider at ρ = 0 .6. At ρ = 0 .8, the procedures did not satisfy the 0.03 coverage-matching tolerance, so no efficiency comparison is made. These width comparisons use the same 50 prespeci-fied S4 target identities, with 10 identities at each ρ ∈{0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8}. Full finite-domain inversion across M3, M4, and M6 yields 150 inversion records; M2 and M5 contribute their closed-form returned intervals on the same 10 

TABLE I OVERALL MINE DOSE BENCH PERFORMANCE ACROSS 27 C ONFIGURATIONS 

Method Mean Sel. Cov. Min. Sel. Cov. Cases 

≥ 0.90 Mean Local 

q0.05 

Min. Local 

q0.05 

Return Rate 

M2 0.8855 0.8022 8/27 0.8265 0.7079 0.9500 M3 0.9856 0.8360 26/27 0.9725 0.7464 1.0000 M4 0.9805 0.9422 27/27 0.9574 0.8804 0.9500 M5 0.8989 0.8360 12/27 0.8385 0.7694 0.8945 

M6 0.9692 0.9140 27/27 0.9488 0.8951 0.9500 

Notes: Results use the RF-primary track on the observed benchmark-response scale. Treatment-dependent primary methods use the frozen estimated mixed-propensity model bg(A | U ); the oracle treatment law is not the primary MineDoseBench track. Sel. Cov. denotes selective coverage conditional on a returned prediction set. Local q0.05 is the fifth percentile of target-local selective coverage. Means are calculated across the 27 configurations. M4 is the naive-product comparator and is not generally theorem-backed. Width is not reported because efficiency is interpreted only under matched selective coverage. 

Fig. 2. MineDoseBench selective coverage, local robustness, and support-aware refusal across 27 configurations. (a) Configuration-wise selective coverage of full GeoDose-CP (M6). (b) Fifth-percentile target-local selective coverage for M2–M6. (c) Operational refusal rates for M2–M6. Dashed horizontal lines denote nominal 0.90 coverage. Results correspond to the RF-primary evaluation on the observed benchmark-response scale. 

registered identities, intersected with the benchmark response domain YMDB = [ −1, 1] , for the efficiency-only comparison. The resulting widths therefore provide targeted structural-efficiency evidence rather than population-level sharpness es-timates. Overall, M6 maintained stable selective coverage as spatial dependence increased, while its efficiency relative to M5 remained regime-dependent. 

C. Approximation, Stress, and Support Boundaries 

Exact and sparse M6 showed close aggregate and decision-level agreement, although pointwise equality was not claimed. Across 2,700 paired target identities, selective coverage was 0.9885 for exact inference and 0.9874 for the sparse m = 64 

route. Mean absolute p-value discrepancy was 0.00557 and the median was numerically zero, with 

q0.90 = 0 .01607 , q0.95 = 0 .03467 , q0.99 = 0 .09739 ,

(32) and maximum |∆p| = 0 .42945 . Discrepancies exceeded 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 for 352 (13.0%), 76 (2.81%), and 23 (0.85%) targets, respectively, yet only 9/2,700 (0.33%) changed inclusion status at α = 0 .10 . Thus, sparse inference remained close to the exact route at the aggregate and decision levels despite a small number of materially larger pointwise discrepancies. The largest occurred in S2 ( pexact = 0 .8702 ,

psparse = 0 .4408 ) without changing the inclusion decision. Within S4, approximation sensitivity increased with spatial dependence: mean |∆p| was approximately zero at ρ = 0 

and 0.00159, 0.00318, 0.00451, and 0.00690 at ρ = 0.2,0.4, 0.6, and 0.8, respectively; two decision disagreements 11                                      

> Fig. 3. Effect of increasing spatial dependence in S4. (a) RF-primary selective coverage of M2–M6 for ρ∈ { 0,0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8}; error bars denote 95% replication-by-mine cluster-bootstrap confidence intervals. (b) Mean finite-domain interval/hull width on YMDB = [ −1,1] for the same prespecified S4 target identities. For M3, M4, and M6, widths are obtained from full finite-domain candidate inversion; for M2 and M5, closed-form returned intervals are intersected with YMDB for this efficiency-only representation. Error bars denote 95% replication-by-mine cluster-bootstrap confidence intervals for mean width. Width is interpreted as efficiency only when the selective-coverage difference satisfies the prespecified 0.03 coverage-matching criterion; the ρ= 0 .8M6–M5 comparison is therefore not interpreted as an efficiency comparison.
> Fig. 4. Exact–sparse M6 discrepancy across 2,700 paired registered target identities. The empirical cumulative distribution function shows the absolute difference |∆p|between full-graph exact inference and the sparse m= 64
> route. Vertical reference lines mark the 0.90, 0.95, and 0.99 quantiles (0.01607 ,0.03467 , and 0.09739 , respectively). The median discrepancy is numerically zero and the maximum is 0.42945 . Only 9 of 2,700 targets (0.33%) changed inclusion status at α=0.10 , so close aggregate and decision-level agreement does not imply pointwise numerical equivalence.

occurred at ρ = 0 .8. Unambiguous target-level linkage be-tween discrepancy and ESS/maximum-weight diagnostics was available for only 51/2,700 identities, so no general diagnostic association is inferred. The m = 64 route therefore provides close aggregate approximation while retaining nonzero query-level approximation error. A complementary structural audit examined the product construction in (8). Under the reduction condition, the factor-ized and joint graph-local constructions agreed to numerical precision; under the nonfactorizing treatment–spatial regime, their candidate-specific relationship became nonconstant. The audit therefore recovers factorization in its valid special case while confirming that it does not, in general, reproduce the G2 target-orbit law. Table II summarizes the principal robustness and support-boundary results. M6 remained above nominal selective coverage under target-design shift (0.9644), non-Gaussian dependence (0.9667), five measurement-error perturbations (0.966–0.972), and the 90-m/180-m change-of-support anal-ysis (0.9640/0.9578), with return rates of 100% and 90% at the two spatial supports, respectively. Support limitations produced distinct operating behavior. Genuine endpoint atoms at A = 0 and A = 1 yielded selective coverage of 0.980 and 0.990 with 100% return, whereas the corresponding interior-only law refused every endpoint query rather than borrowing support from nearby continuous mass. Under severe-tail stress, M6 returned 60% of queries with selective coverage 1.000, while false support remained 0.05. Leave-one-mine-out transfer produced 100% refusal across all 375 M6 queries because the held-out mine lacked a connected local calibration orbit. Hidden spatial confounding remained a negative control: predictive selective coverage was 0.966, but this does not restore the conditional ignorability required for causal interpretation. 12                                    

> TABLE II STRESS , S UPPORT ,AND APPLICABILITY AUDITS FOR GEO DOSE -CP
> Audit Selective coverage Return/support Principal finding
> Target-design shift 0.9644 90% return Coverage remains above the nominal 0.90 level under nonidentity target-design shift. Non-Gaussian spatial law 0.9667 90% return Coverage remains above nominal under the non-Gaussian residual-dependence setting. Measurement-error perturbations 0.966–0.972 100% return Coverage remains above nominal across all five measurement-error perturbations. Change of spatial support 90 m: 0.9640; 180 m: 0.9578 90 m: 100% return; 180 m: 90% return Coverage remains above nominal at both independently anchored spatial supports, with lower return at 180 m. Supported endpoint atoms A= 0 : 0.980;
> A= 1 : 0.990 100% return at both atoms Both genuine endpoint atoms remain supported under the mixed treatment measure. Unsupported endpoints —100% refusal at A= 0 ,1The interior-only treatment law refuses unsupported endpoint queries rather than assigning artificial endpoint mass. Severe-tail support stress 1.000 60% return; false support = 0 .05
> Selective coverage is retained among returned queries, but support loss reduces return and residual false support remains. Hidden spatial confounding 0.966 100% return; false support = 0 .05
> Negative control: predictive coverage remains high despite violation of the causal-identification condition. Leave-one-mine-out —0% return; 375/375 refused All held-out-mine M6 queries refuse because a connected local calibration orbit is unavailable; successful cross-mine local-orbit transfer is not demonstrated.
> Notes: Coverage denotes selective coverage among returned prediction sets; refused queries are reported separately and are not counted as noncoverage. “—” indicates that selective coverage is undefined because no prediction sets were returned. False support denotes the prespecified rate at which a benchmark query with a known support failure nevertheless passes the applicable operational support gate. The hidden-confounding experiment is a negative control and does not provide evidence of causal identification.

D. Treatment-Density Sensitivity and External Comparators 1) Treatment-Density Sensitivity: Holding all non-treatment components of the RF-primary M6 pipeline fixed, the es-timated treatment law closely tracked the oracle over the selected seven-configuration subset (Table III). Mean selec-tive coverage was 0.9830 for GORACLE and 0.9825 for 

GESTIMATED , with mean local q0.05 of 0.9661 and 0.9655, respectively. Their minimum selective coverages were 0.9680 and 0.9644, and minimum local q0.05 values were 0.9347 and 0.9267. Misspecification was more visible locally than globally. 

GMISSPECIFIED retained mean selective coverage of 0.9786, but its mean and minimum local q0.05 decreased to 0.9545 and 0.8882. Under strong dependence combined with target-design shift, local q0.05 was 0.9347, 0.9267, and 0.8882 for the oracle, estimated, and misspecified laws, respectively. Support diagnostics did not identify misspecification by themselves. Mean support ESS was 146.46, 89.17, and 415.47 for GORACLE , GESTIMATED , and GMISSPECIFIED , respec-tively, while mean maximum normalized weight was 0.1513, 0.2203, and 0.0714. The misspecified law therefore appeared most favorable by weight dispersion despite producing the weakest lower-tail local coverage. Large ESS and diffuse normalized weights indicate favorable support concentration, but they do not establish correctness of the treatment model 

g(A | U ).

2) External Comparator Evaluation: Table IV sum-marizes M6 and three adapted conformal families on the selected MineDoseBench external-comparator subset: continuous-treatment inference (E1), weighted distribution-shift inference (E2), and spatial/local calibration (E3). Because E1 is natively inapplicable to an exact atomic target query, its aggregate statistics use six applicable configurations, whereas E2, E3, and M6 use all seven. A strict six-configuration all-method comparison is reported in the Supplement. On this strict common subset, mean selective coverage remained ordered M6 (0.9796) > E3 (0.9510) > E2 (0.9153) > E1 (0.8970), and the same ordering held for mean local q0.05 .On this descriptive selected-subset summary, mean selective coverage was 0.8970, 0.9191, 0.9463, and 0.9825 for E1, E2, E3, and M6, respectively; the corresponding minimum values were 0.8120, 0.8580, 0.9180, and 0.9644. Mean local 

q0.05 was 0.8310, 0.8701, 0.9134, and 0.9655, with minima of 0.7193, 0.7940, 0.8817, and 0.9267, respectively. E3 was the strongest external comparator, while M6 showed the strongest selective-coverage and lower-tail local profile on the evaluated supported regimes. The joint treatment–spatial stresses produced the clearest separation. At ρ = 0 .6, selective coverage was 0.872, 0.858, 0.958, and 0.9778 for E1, E2, E3, and M6. With target-design shift added, coverage was 0.812, 0.934, 0.950, and 0.9644, while local q0.05 was 0.7193, 0.8920, 0.9253, and 0.9267, respectively. These regimes are especially informative because treatment shift and spatial dependence act jointly, the setting for which G2 constructs a candidate-specific joint reference law rather than combining separately derived treatment and spatial weights. Operational behavior also differed (Fig. 5). Among queries returned by both M6 and E3, M6 achieved higher selective coverage in all seven configurations, with casewise advantages 13                                                                                    

> TABLE III TREATMENT -D ENSITY SENSITIVITY FOR M6
> Treatment law Mean sel. cov. Min. sel. cov. Mean local q0.05 Min. local q0.05 Return rate
> GORACLE 0.9830 0.9680 0.9661 0.9347 0.9571
> GESTIMATED 0.9825 0.9644 0.9655 0.9267 0.9071
> GMISSPECIFIED 0.9786 0.9537 0.9545 0.8882 0.9857
> Notes: Results use the same seven configurations and 20 replications for each treatment-law specification, with all non-treatment components held fixed.
> GESTIMATED is the treatment model used by the registered RF-primary M6 pipeline. Coverage is selective among returned prediction sets. TABLE IV EXTERNAL -C OMPARATOR PERFORMANCE ON THE SELECTED MINE DOSE BENCH EVALUATION SUBSET
> Method Mean Min. Cases Mean local Min. local Native Return Infinite-set sel. cov. sel. cov. ≥0.90 q0.05 q0.05 applicability |applicable |returned
> E1 continuous-treatment 0.8970 0.8120 3/6 0.8310 0.7193 0.8571 1.0000 0.3097 E2 weighted shift 0.9191 0.8580 5/7 0.8701 0.7940 1.0000 1.0000 0.2714 E3 spatial/local 0.9463 0.9180 7/7 0.9134 0.8817 1.0000 1.0000 0.0000 M6 GeoDose-CP 0.9825 0.9644 7/7 0.9655 0.9267 1.0000 0.9071 0.0000
> Notes: E1–E3 are mechanism-aligned adaptations of published method families, not exact software reproductions. Native applicability is the proportion of registered queries for which a method is defined under its own support conditions. Return rate is calculated conditional on native applicability. E1 is natively inapplicable to the exact atomic-target configuration under its implemented continuous-treatment formulation; this is nonapplicability, not refusal. Consequently, E1 contributes six configurations to its coverage summaries and has native applicability 0.8571 but return rate 1.0000 among applicable queries. Infinite-set rate is calculated among returned prediction sets and denotes vacuous or unbounded returned sets. M6 uses GESTIMATED . A strict six-configuration all-method comparison is provided in the Supplement.

of approximately 1.0–8.2 percentage points. Under severe-tail stress, E1 and E2 produced infinite sets for more than 93% of applicable queries, whereas M6 returned finite sets for 60% and refused the remainder, with selective coverage 1.000 among returned sets. Thus, refusal and vacuous return represent distinct responses to deteriorating support. Prediction-set width is interpreted only when (29) is satis-fied. On the restricted coverage-matched inversion subset, E3 can produce substantially sharper sets than M6. The external comparison therefore supports a stronger selective-coverage and lower-tail local robustness profile for M6 in the evaluated supported regimes, while providing no basis for a claim of universal efficiency superiority. 

E. Real NSW Observed-Product Results 

The NSW archive did not provide the longitudinal contin-uous rehabilitation treatment required by the target estimand. Consequently, treatment-dependent procedures M2, M4, and M6 were nonoperational and no proxy treatment was intro-duced. The real-data results therefore concern M1, M3, and the treatment-free graph-safe fallback (GS) as predictive or spatial-calibration procedures for the observed EO product. GS is distinct from the treatment-weighted MineDoseBench M5 baseline. Figure 6 shows the geographically buffered 90-m design for Mt Arthur Coal, Hunter Valley Operations (HVO), and Bulga Complex, together with M3 conformity p-values for held-out RF-primary targets. These p-values characterize conformity with the fitted spatial reference and are interpreted as empirical diagnostics rather than theorem-certified coverage guarantees or causal evidence. Observed-product coverage varied substantially with spatial support and predictor. Under RF, pooled M1/M3/GS coverage was 0.8381/0.8154/0.8447 at 90 m and 0.9401/0.8231/0.9201 at 180 m. Under XGBoost, the corresponding values were 0.9028/0.9050/0.8644 and 0.9472/0.8545/0.9344. These changes indicate support- and model-sensitivity rather than superiority of the coarser resolution. Geographic heterogeneity was also pronounced. In the 90-m RF analysis, M1/M3/GS coverage was 0.9595/0.9285/0.9619 at Mt Arthur, 0.8028/0.7306/0.7780 at HVO, and 0.6193/0.6995/0.6885 at Bulga. Model sensitivity was site dependent: under 90-m XGBoost, Bulga M1/M3 coverage increased to 0.9927/0.9873, whereas HVO remained at 0.7963/0.7909. The real-data study therefore does not support a universal 0.90 observed-product coverage claim. The fitted spatial nuisance also indicated a demanding dependence regime. Ten of 12 mine ×scale ×predictor fits selected ρ = 0 .8, the upper limit of the specified grid; the exceptions were Bulga at 180 m, with ρ = 0 .4 for RF and 

ρ = 0 .6 for XGBoost. These fitted quantities remain empirical rather than finite-sample theorem-certified and indicate strong residual dependence and/or spatial model mismatch. The stricter UE ≤ 20 sensitivity retained 94.6–98.3% of eligible 90-m cells and 88.7–96.5% at 180 m across the three mines, with only small qualitative changes to the main coverage patterns. The principal site, support, and model sen-sitivities were therefore not attributable solely to the primary UE eligibility threshold. Figure 7 summarizes observed-product coverage and width for the applicable procedures under the primary 90-m RF analysis. Coverage in panel (a) is summarized over the full held-out test frame. For panel (b), M1, M3, and GS widths are evaluated on the same frozen 60-target outcome-blind subset used for finite-domain M3 inversion, yielding mean widths of 0.3097, 0.3575, and 0.3247, respectively. These widths therefore characterize a common targeted subset rather than 14   

> Fig. 5. External-comparator performance on the selected MineDoseBench evaluation subset. The three panels show configuration-level selective coverage, lower-tail local q0.05 , and return rate conditional on native applicability, respectively. E1, E2, and E3 denote the adapted continuous-treatment, weighted distribution-shift, and spatial/local conformal families; M6 denotes GeoDose-CP using the primary estimated treatment density. Dashed horizontal lines in the upper two panels denote nominal 0.90 coverage. E1 is natively inapplicable in the poor-overlap atomic-target configuration, so no conditional return-rate value is defined there; this is nonapplicability rather than refusal.

full-test-frame or population-level efficiency. Validation geometry materially altered apparent predictive performance. In the RF/M1 predictive leakage diagnostic, random splitting gave coverage 0.8957, mean width 0.1279, and RMSE 0.0540, compared with 0.8381, 0.3097, and 0.1016 under geographically buffered validation. The substantially narrower intervals and lower error under random splitting are consistent with optimistic assessment when training and test observations remain spatially proximate [9], [10], [12]. Cross-mine evaluation provided a further applicability boundary: the held-out mine did not support a connected local calibration orbit for the graph-dependent route, so no successful cross-mine local-orbit transfer was established. To-gether, the NSW results show substantial sensitivity to site, predictor, spatial support, and validation geometry, while also demonstrating that abundant EO observations do not substitute for the treatment provenance required for causal intervention inference. V. D ISCUSSION 

A. What GeoDose-CP Establishes 

The main contribution of GeoDose-CP is structural. When continuous-treatment shift and spatial dependence act jointly, the conformal target reassignment law does not generally reduce to independently constructed treatment and spatial weights. G2 instead places the intervention/observational treat-ment likelihood, inverse outcome-scale Jacobian, and graph-dependent residual likelihood in a single candidate-specific reference law. Exact candidate inversion (G3), sparse approx-imation (N2), practical coverage transfer (N3), and support-aware refusal are downstream layers built on that law rather than substitutes for it. The reduction analysis also defines the scope of this claim. Under additional conditions compatible with factorization, the joint construction reduces to the corresponding product form; outside that regime, the candidate-specific relationship is non-constant. GeoDose-CP therefore does not claim that product weighting is always invalid, but that separately constructed 15 

Fig. 6. Spatial design and empirical uncertainty diagnostics for the NSW demonstration at 90-m support. (a) Buffered partition for Mt Arthur Coal, HVO, and Bulga Complex, including nuisance-training, support, calibration, held-out test, buffer, secondary, and ineligible regions. (b) M3 conformity p-values for held-out RF-primary targets; lower values indicate weaker conformity with the fitted spatial reference. The p-values are empirical diagnostics, not causal evidence or theorem-certified coverage guarantees. 

Fig. 7. Held-out NSW observed-product uncertainty at 90-m support under the primary RF track. (a) Pooled observed-product coverage for M1, M3, and the treatment-free graph-safe fallback GS over the held-out test frame; the dashed horizontal line denotes nominal 0.90 coverage. (b) Mean interval width for M1, M3, and GS evaluated on the same frozen 60-target outcome-blind subset used for finite-domain M3 inversion. The width comparison is therefore restricted to this common target subset and is not interpreted as population-level efficiency. M2, M4, and M6 are nonoperational because an authentic longitudinal rehabilitation treatment is unavailable in the NSW archive. 

treatment and spatial weights are insufficient to justify the general joint target law. 16 

The empirical evidence is consistent with this distinction. M6 maintained nominal-or-higher configuration-level selective coverage across all 27 MineDoseBench configurations and achieved the strongest minimum local q0.05 among M2–M6. On the selected external-comparator subset, M6 also showed the strongest minimum selective coverage and lower-tail local robustness, while E3 was the strongest external comparator. M3 and M4 exhibited higher average local coverage, and M4 performed well empirically despite lacking general G2 justifi-cation. Accordingly, the evidence supports a strong supported-regime selective-coverage and lower-tail local-robustness pro-file for the joint construction, rather than universal numerical dominance. The strong performance of M4 is therefore informative rather than contradictory. A factorized method can perform well on a finite benchmark without representing the reference law implied by the joint treatment–spatial model. The dis-tinction between M4 and M6 is ultimately one of structural justification: M4 is an empirical comparator, whereas G2 specifies the candidate-specific target law under the stated joint model. Causal identification remains a separate requirement. In the hidden spatial-confounding negative control, predictive coverage remained high despite violation of supported ignora-bility. Conformal calibration can therefore quantify uncertainty for a predictive law even when that law does not identify the intended causal intervention. GeoDose-CP accordingly separates identification of the supported stochastic potential outcome from validity of its conformal prediction set [24], [25]. 

B. Validity, Refusal, and Efficiency 

Coverage, refusal, and efficiency represent different infer-ential properties and should not be collapsed into a single ranking. GeoDose-CP often prioritizes validity and support fidelity over universal sharpness, so strong selective coverage may coexist with wider sets or reduced return when the query approaches the limits of the supported target law. The endpoint and severe-tail experiments illustrate this be-havior. Genuine atoms at A = 0 and A = 1 were inferentially supported, whereas the same endpoint queries were refused under an interior-only treatment law rather than approximated from nearby continuous observations. Under severe-tail stress, M6 returned finite sets for 60% of queries and attained selective coverage of 1.000 among those returned. By contrast, E1 and E2 produced infinite sets for more than 93% of their applicable severe-tail queries. Explicit refusal and vacuous inference can therefore preserve coverage in fundamentally different ways. Refusal is not itself a guarantee of correct support assess-ment. A false-support rate of 0.05 remained under severe-tail stress, and observable support diagnostics cannot certify causal assumptions such as conditional ignorability. ESS, weight concentration, graph support, and endpoint checks are therefore operational diagnostics; they identify important observable failure modes but cannot replace assumptions about the treatment and outcome-generating process. Efficiency is likewise regime-dependent. Under the matched-coverage rule in (29), M6 was 3.8%, 4.9%, and 11.4% narrower than M5 at ρ = 0 , 0.2, and 0.4, respectively, but 31.2% wider at ρ = 0.6; at ρ = 0.8, the methods were not coverage-matched and no efficiency comparison was warranted. These results arise from the targeted finite-domain inversion audit and should not be interpreted as population-level sharpness estimates. The external comparison reinforces the same boundary. On coverage-matched restricted inversions, the spatial/local comparator E3 can be substantially sharper than M6. The strongest empirical case for GeoDose-CP is therefore the combination of supported-regime selective coverage, lower-tail local robustness, and explicit behavior when support deteriorates—not universal interval efficiency. 

C. Scalable Inference and Practical Certification 

The exact–sparse audit supports scalable GeoDose-CP at the aggregate level but not pointwise equivalence. Exact and sparse M6 selective coverage were nearly identical (0.9885 and 0.9874), and only 9/2,700 targets (0.33%) changed inclusion status at α = 0.10 . Nevertheless, individual discrepancies could be much larger, with max |∆p| = 0 .42945 . The sparse route should therefore be interpreted as an accurate aggregate approximation whose query-level error remains nonzero. Approximation sensitivity increased with spatial depen-dence across S4, consistent with a harder sparse representation as residual dependence strengthened. This pattern should not be attributed generally to low ESS or concentrated weights: target-level linkage to those diagnostics was unambiguous for only 51/2,700 exact-audit identities. The present evidence therefore supports a dependence-related approximation pattern without establishing a universal mechanism for the largest pointwise errors. Treatment-density estimation defines a separate practical uncertainty layer. GESTIMATED closely tracked GORACLE 

in aggregate, whereas deliberate misspecification weakened lower-tail local performance, reducing the minimum local q0.05 

to 0.8882. Importantly, the misspecified model simultaneously produced more favorable ESS and maximum-weight diag-nostics. Support concentration metrics can therefore identify instability but cannot validate the correctness of g(A | U ).These results reinforce the distinction among four objects: the exact graph-local target law, its sparse approximation, fitted nuisance models, and finite-sample certification. Empir-ical agreement between exact and sparse inference does not eliminate approximation error, just as close oracle–estimated agreement does not make a fitted treatment model theorem-certified. N2 and N3 keep these transitions explicit rather than absorbing them into a single empirical-validity claim. This distinction is particularly relevant in EO applications, where flexible learning models can capture complex envi-ronmental structure while formal characterization of depen-dence, treatment assignment, and approximation error remains difficult [28], [29], [36]. RF, XGBoost, and fitted spatial nuisance models can therefore be useful practical components of GeoDose-CP without being assigned stronger guarantees than those actually established. 17 

D. Earth-Observation Applicability, Limitations, and Outlook 

The NSW study examines whether the inputs required by GeoDose-CP remain scientifically defensible in a real EO archive. Its design combines outcome-blind site selec-tion, satellite-product quality screening, pretreatment-only pre-dictors, geographically separated validation, and change-of-support analysis [9], [11], [59]. It is therefore an applicability study, not a real-data causal validation of full M6. The principal boundary is treatment authenticity. The NSW archive contains spatial rehabilitation information but not an auditable longitudinal continuous rehabilitation treatment consistent with the estimand. Constructing a snapshot-derived proxy would change the scientific question rather than validate the intended intervention. Treatment-dependent procedures therefore remain nonoperational, and the real-data analysis is restricted to M1, M3, and the treatment-free graph-safe fallback GS. This fail-closed behavior is central to the intended use of GeoDose-CP: the availability of EO observations does not by itself justify an intervention query. These procedures operate on observed DEA photosynthetic-vegetation change, which is a satellite-derived product rather than an error-free latent measure of ecological recovery [46], [57], [58]. Their coverage and width therefore characterize observed-product predictive uncertainty, not causal GeoDose-CP validity or uncertainty in latent ecological state. The NSW results also show substantial geographic and model dependence. Coverage differed markedly among Mt Arthur, HVO, and Bulga, and changing from RF to XGBoost altered site-specific behavior rather than producing a uniform shift. Pooled performance should therefore not be interpreted as universal nominal coverage across mines. Consistently, 10 of 12 mine ×scale ×predictor spatial fits selected ρ = 0 .8, the upper boundary of the fitted grid, indicating strong residual dependence and/or spatial model mismatch. These fitted spatial nuisances, and their associated N3 quantities, are empirical diagnostics rather than finite-sample certified coverage bounds. EO-product quality was not the dominant explanation for these patterns. The stricter UE ≤ 20 sensitivity retained most eligible cells and did not materially alter the principal site-, support-, or model-dependent findings. In contrast, validation geometry had a large effect: random partitioning produced substantially narrower intervals and lower prediction error than geographically buffered validation. This is consistent with optimistic assessment when training and test observa-tions remain spatially proximate [9]–[12]. For geographically separated deployment, validation design is therefore part of the scientific problem rather than a purely technical choice. Cross-mine transfer defines a still stronger support boundary. Under leave-one-mine-out evaluation, the graph-dependent route could not form a connected local calibration orbit for the held-out mine, so successful cross-mine local-orbit transfer was not demonstrated [14], [35]. More generally, dense EO observation does not guarantee intervention support: outcomes and covariates may be abundant while the treatment provenance and spatial calibration structure required for causal intervention inference remain absent. Several limitations follow directly from these results. In the primary MineDoseBench benchmark, the unit residual scale makes the inverse-scale Jacobian equal to one and numerically inactive. GeoDose-CP can produce wider sets in some coverage-matched regimes, and spatial/local conformal methods such as E3 can be sharper. Sparse inference is close to exact inference at aggregate and decision levels but can differ materially for individual queries. Treatment-density misspec-ification can degrade lower-tail local robustness even when weight diagnostics appear favorable, and support gates do not eliminate false-support behavior or certify untestable causal assumptions. The NSW study additionally lacks an authentic longitudinal treatment, uses an observed EO product rather than latent ecological truth, has no independent bare-ground confirmation, provides no evidence of successful causal trans-fer to disconnected mines, and does not establish finite-sample certification of the fitted real-data spatial nuisance. Future work should prioritize EO datasets containing an authentic longitudinal rehabilitation treatment, repeated out-comes, and spatially connected calibration support across sites. Methodologically, tighter query-level sparse certificates, richer observational treatment models including dependent assign-ment, and carefully bounded extensions to causal interference are natural next steps [39], [40], [60]. These extensions should preserve the central operating principle of GeoDose-CP: un-certainty about treatment authenticity, spatial support, identi-fication, approximation, or certification should remain explicit rather than being converted into unsupported extrapolation. VI. C ONCLUSION 

GeoDose-CP provides a support-aware framework for intervention-oriented EO inference under continuous treatment and spatial dependence, centered on a graph-local target-orbit law that jointly represents treatment shift, outcome-scale transformation, and spatial residual dependence rather than assuming naive factorization. Controlled experiments and MineDoseBench provided complementary known-truth evidence; in MineDoseBench, M6 showed strong selective and lower-tail local coverage across all 27 registered con-figurations, while exact and sparse inference agreed closely at aggregate and decision levels without implying pointwise equivalence. The fitted treatment model closely tracked oracle behavior, whereas deliberate misspecification weakened local robustness, and M6 showed the strongest supported-regime coverage and lower-tail local profile on the selected external-comparator subset, although spatial/local alternatives could be sharper in coverage-matched regimes. The NSW study established a complementary applicability boundary: without an authentic longitudinal rehabilitation treatment, treatment-dependent inference remained nonoperational rather than be-ing forced through a proxy exposure. Overall, GeoDose-CP links supported intervention targeting, graph-local conformal inference, scalable approximation, and principled refusal while keeping treatment authenticity and inferential support explicit. CODE AND DATA AVAILABILITY 

The publication code, frozen experimental configura-tions, evaluation scripts, MineDoseBench implementation 18 

and provenance materials, and data-provenance records as-sociated with this study are publicly available at https: //github.com/Khalidsakib-121/GeoDose-CP. The frozen re-producibility release corresponding to this manuscript is available at https://github.com/Khalidsakib-121/GeoDose-CP/ releases/tag/v1.0.0-paper. Derived materials that may be redistributed are included in the repository. Original third-party data from NSW Gov-ernment sources, Digital Earth Australia, SILO, TERN, and Geoscience Australia are not redistributed; source identifiers, access information, and processing provenance required to reconstruct the analysis inputs are provided in the repository. DECLARATION OF GENERATIVE AI AND AI-ASSISTED 

TECHNOLOGIES IN THE WRITING PROCESS 

During the preparation of this work the authors used Gram-marly in order to proofread the manuscript and improve the clarity of the English writing. After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the content of the published article. REFERENCES [1] N. Gorelick, M. Hancher, M. Dixon, S. Ilyushchenko, D. Thau, and R. Moore, “Google Earth Engine: Planetary-scale geospatial analysis for everyone,” Remote Sensing of Environment , vol. 202, pp. 18–27, 2017. [2] M. Reichstein, G. Camps-Valls, B. Stevens, M. Jung, J. Denzler, N. Carvalhais, and Prabhat, “Deep learning and process understanding for data-driven Earth system science,” Nature , vol. 566, pp. 195–204, 2019. [3] T. T. Werner et al. , “Global-scale remote sensing of mine areas and anal-ysis of factors explaining their extent,” Global Environmental Change ,vol. 60, p. 102007, 2020. [4] V. Maus et al. , “An update on global mining land use,” Scientific Data ,vol. 9, p. 433, 2022. [5] L. Tang and T. T. Werner, “Global mining footprint mapped from high-resolution satellite imagery,” Communications Earth & Environment ,vol. 4, pp. 1–12, 2023. [6] J. J. Vidal-Macua, J. M. Nicolau, E. Vicente, and M. Moreno-de las Heras, “Assessing vegetation recovery in reclaimed opencast mines of the Teruel coalfield (Spain) using Landsat time series and boosted regression trees,” Science of The Total Environment , vol. 717, p. 137250, 2020. [7] G. Camps-Valls et al. , “A survey on Gaussian processes for Earth-observation data analysis: A comprehensive investigation,” IEEE Geo-science and Remote Sensing Magazine , vol. 4, pp. 58–78, 2016. [8] D. H. Svendsen, P. Morales- ´ Alvarez, A. B. Ruescas, R. Molina, and G. Camps-Valls, “Deep Gaussian processes for biogeophysical parameter retrieval and model inversion,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , vol. 166, pp. 68–81, 2020. [9] D. R. Roberts, V. Bahn, S. Ciuti, M. S. Boyce, J. Elith, G. Guillera-Arroita, S. Hauenstein, J. J. Lahoz-Monfort, B. Schr¨ oder, W. Thuiller, D. I. Warton, B. A. Wintle, F. Hartig, and C. F. Dormann, “Cross-validation strategies for data with temporal, spatial, hierarchical, or phylogenetic structure,” Ecography , vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 913–929, 2017. [10] R. Valavi, J. Elith, J. J. Lahoz-Monfort, and G. Guillera-Arroita, “blockCV: An R package for generating spatially or environmentally separated folds for k-fold cross-validation of species distribution mod-els,” Methods in Ecology and Evolution , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 225–232, 2019. [11] H. Meyer, C. Reudenbach, T. Hengl, M. Katurji, and T. Nauss, “Im-proving performance of spatio-temporal machine learning models using forward feature selection and target-oriented validation,” Environmental Modelling & Software , vol. 101, pp. 1–9, 2018. [12] P. Ploton, F. Mortier, M. R´ ejou-M´ echain et al. , “Spatial validation reveals poor predictive performance of large-scale ecological mapping models,” 

Nature Communications , vol. 11, p. 4540, 2020. [13] H. Meyer, C. Reudenbach, S. W¨ ollauer, and T. Nauss, “Importance of spatial predictor variable selection in machine learning applications— moving from data reproduction to spatial prediction,” Ecological Mod-elling , vol. 411, p. 108815, 2019. [14] M. Ludwig, ´ A. Moreno-Mart´ ınez, N. H¨ olzel, E. Pebesma, and H. Meyer, “Assessing and improving the transferability of current global spatial prediction models,” Global Ecology and Biogeography , vol. 32, pp. 356– 368, 2023. [15] G. W. Imbens, “The role of the propensity score in estimating dose-response functions,” Biometrika , vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 706–710, 2000. [16] K. Imai and D. A. van Dyk, “Causal inference with general treatment regimes: Generalizing the propensity score,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 99, no. 467, pp. 854–866, 2004. [17] E. H. Kennedy, Z. Ma, M. D. McHugh, and D. S. Small, “Non-parametric methods for doubly robust estimation of continuous treatment effects,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , vol. 79, no. 4, pp. 1229–1245, 2017. [18] C. Fong, C. Hazlett, and K. Imai, “Covariate balancing propensity score for a continuous treatment: Application to the efficacy of political advertisements,” The Annals of Applied Statistics , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 156–177, 2018. [19] G. Papadogeorgou and F. Dominici, “A causal exposure response func-tion with local adjustment for confounding: Estimating health effects of exposure to low levels of ambient fine particulate matter,” The Annals of Applied Statistics , vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 850–871, 2020. [20] G. Shafer and V. Vovk, “A tutorial on conformal prediction,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 9, pp. 371–421, 2008. [21] J. Lei and L. Wasserman, “Distribution-free prediction bands for non-parametric regression,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 71–96, 2014. [22] J. Lei, M. G’Sell, A. Rinaldo, R. J. Tibshirani, and L. Wasserman, “Distribution-free predictive inference for regression,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 113, no. 523, pp. 1094–1111, 2018. [23] R. F. Barber, E. J. Cand` es, A. Ramdas, and R. J. Tibshirani, “Predictive inference with the jackknife+,” The Annals of Statistics , vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 486–507, 2021. [24] L. Lei and E. J. Cand` es, “Conformal inference of counterfactuals and individual treatment effects,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , vol. 83, no. 5, pp. 911–938, 2021. [25] J. Qin, Y. Liu, M. Li, and C.-Y. Huang, “Distribution-free prediction intervals under covariate shift, with an application to causal inference,” 

Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 120, no. 549, pp. 559–571, 2025. [26] M. Schr¨ oder, D. Frauen, J. Schweisthal, K. Hess, V. Melnychuk, and S. Feuerriegel, “Conformal prediction for causal effects of continuous treatments,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 38, 2025, pp. 1736–1775. [Online]. Available: https: //doi.org/10.52202/085713-0057 [27] J. Verhaeghe, J. Jonkers, and S. Van Hoecke, “Conformal prediction for dose-response models with continuous treatments,” International Journal of Approximate Reasoning , vol. 197, p. 109751, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijar.2026.109751 [28] R. F. Barber, E. J. Cand` es, A. Ramdas, and R. J. Tibshirani, “Conformal prediction beyond exchangeability,” The Annals of Statistics , vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 816–845, 2023. [29] R. I. Oliveira, P. Orenstein, T. Ramos, and J. V. Romano, “Split conformal prediction and non-exchangeable data,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 25, no. 225, pp. 1–38, 2024. [30] L. Guan, “Localized conformal prediction: A generalized inference framework for conformal prediction,” Biometrika , vol. 110, no. 1, pp. 33–50, 2023. [31] R. Hore and R. F. Barber, “Conformal prediction with local weights: Randomization enables robust guarantees,” Journal of the Royal Sta-tistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 549–578, 2025. [32] H. Qiu, E. Dobriban, and E. J. Tchetgen Tchetgen, “Prediction sets adaptive to unknown covariate shift,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , vol. 85, no. 5, pp. 1680–1705, 2023. [33] Y. Yang, A. K. Kuchibhotla, and E. J. Tchetgen Tchetgen, “Doubly robust calibration of prediction sets under covariate shift,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 943–965, 2024. [34] I. Gibbs and E. J. Cand` es, “Conformal inference for online predic-tion with arbitrary distribution shifts,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 25, pp. 1–36, 2024. 19 

[35] C. Zhang, T. Li, J. Xie, L. Kong, and B. Jiang, “Transfer conformal pre-dictive inference for regression,” Journal of Machine Learning Research ,vol. 27, no. 90, pp. 1–68, 2026. [36] H. Mao, R. Martin, and B. J. Reich, “Valid model-free spatial predic-tion,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 119, no. 546, pp. 904–914, 2024. [37] M. G. Hudgens and M. E. Halloran, “Toward causal inference with interference,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 103, no. 482, pp. 832–842, 2008. [38] E. J. Tchetgen Tchetgen and T. J. VanderWeele, “On causal inference in the presence of interference,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research ,vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 55–75, 2012. [39] A. Giffin, B. J. Reich, S. Yang, and A. G. Rappold, “Generalized propensity score approach to causal inference with spatial interference,” 

Biometrics , vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 2220–2231, 2023. [40] G. Papadogeorgou, K. Imai, J. Lyall, and F. Li, “Causal inference with spatio-temporal data: Estimating the effects of airstrikes on insurgent violence in Iraq,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 1969–1999, 2022. [41] R. F. Barber and R. J. Tibshirani, “Unifying different theories of conformal prediction,” Electronic Journal of Statistics , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1428–1474, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1214/ 26-EJS2513 [42] D. Prinster, S. D. Stanton, A. Liu, and S. Saria, “Conformal validity guarantees exist for any data distribution (and how to find them),” in Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 235, 2024, pp. 41 086–41 118. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/prinster24a.html [43] M. Katzfuss and J. Guinness, “A general framework for Vecchia approximations of Gaussian processes,” Statistical Science , vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 124–141, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1214/ 19-STS755 [44] I. Gibbs, J. J. Cherian, and E. J. Cand` es, “Conformal prediction with conditional guarantees,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 1100–1126, 2025. [45] NSW Resources - Resources Regulator, “Mine rehabilitation data,” NSW Government, 2024, data source: SEED. Updated May 7, 2026. Accessed Aug. 13, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://data.nsw.gov.au/ data/dataset/mine-rehabilitation [46] L. Lymburner, “Geoscience Australia Landsat Fractional Cover Collection 3,” Geoscience Australia, Canberra, Australia, 2021, DEA product ID: ga ls fc 3. Accessed Aug. 13, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://pid.geoscience.gov.au/dataset/ga/145498 [47] Geoscience Australia, “DEA water observations,” Geoscience Australia, Canberra, Australia, 2022, Landsat product ID: ga ls wo 3. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.26186/146257 [48] Queensland Government, “SILO gridded climate data,” SILO, LongPaddock, Australian gridded climate data. Accessed Aug. 13, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.longpaddock.qld.gov.au/silo/ gridded-data/ [49] S. J. Jeffrey, J. O. Carter, K. B. Moodie, and A. R. Beswick, “Using spatial interpolation to construct a comprehensive archive of Australian climate data,” Environmental Modelling & Software , vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 309–330, 2001. [50] A. Wadoux, M. Dobarco, B. Malone, B. Minasny, A. McBratney, and R. Searle, “Soil and landscape grid national soil attribute maps - organic carbon (3 arc second resolution) - release 2,” Terrestrial Ecosystem Research Network, 2024, version 2.0. Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.25919/ejhm-c070 [51] B. Malone and R. Searle, “Soil and landscape grid national soil attribute maps - pH - calcium chloride (3 arc second resolution) -release 2,” Terrestrial Ecosystem Research Network, 2024, version 2. Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.25919/7320-hw30 [52] ——, “Soil and landscape grid national soil attribute maps -clay (3 arc second resolution) - release 2,” Terrestrial Ecosystem Research Network, 2022, version 2. Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.25919/hc4s-3130 [53] B. Malone, “Soil and landscape grid national soil attribute maps - bulk density - whole Earth - release 2,” Terrestrial Ecosystem Research Network, 2023, version 2. Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.25919/gxyn-pd07 [54] R. Searle, P. D. S. N. Somarathna, and B. Malone, “Soil and landscape grid national soil attribute maps - available volumetric water capacity (percent) (3 arc second resolution) version 2,” Terrestrial Ecosystem Research Network, 2023, version 2.0. Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.25919/4jwj-na34 [55] J. Gallant, N. Wilson, T. Dowling, A. Read, and C. Inskeep, “SRTM-derived 1 second digital elevation models version 1.0,” Geoscience Australia, Canberra, Australia, 2011, Geoscience Australia catalogue ID: 72759. [Online]. Available: https://pid.geoscience.gov.au/dataset/ga/ 72759 [56] G. Singh, G. Moncrieff, Z. Venter, K. Cawse-Nicholson, J. Slingsby, and T. B. Robinson, “Uncertainty quantification for probabilistic machine learning in Earth Observation using conformal prediction,” Scientific Reports , vol. 14, p. 16166, 2024. [57] L. Mart´ ınez-Ferrer et al. , “Quantifying uncertainty in high resolution biophysical variable retrieval with machine learning,” Remote Sensing of Environment , vol. 280, p. 113199, 2022. [58] J. L. Garc´ ıa-Soria, M. Morata, K. Berger, A. B. Pascual-Venteo, J. P. Rivera-Caicedo, and J. Verrelst, “Evaluating epistemic uncertainty esti-mation strategies in vegetation trait retrieval using hybrid models and imaging spectroscopy data,” Remote Sensing of Environment , vol. 310, p. 114228, 2024. [59] D. Koldasbayeva, P. Tregubova, M. Gasanov, A. Zaytsev, A. Petrovskaia, and E. Burnaev, “Challenges in data-driven geospatial modeling for environmental research and practice,” Nature Communications , vol. 15, p. 10700, 2024. [60] M. P. Leung, “Rate-optimal cluster-randomized designs for spatial interference,” The Annals of Statistics , vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 3064–3087, 2022.