Title: Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22336v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 01:59:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

# Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

# Seungjin Choi 

CROID Research and aSSIST University, Korea 

Abstract 

Conformal selection aims to identify test candidates whose unknown responses fall in a target region while controlling the false discovery rate. Existing methods often inherit prediction-oriented nonconformity scores, such as residual or clipped residual scores, from conformal prediction. We argue that the natural score for selection is instead the target-membership probability ηI (x) = P(Y ∈ I | 

X = x). This score directly addresses the binary event being selected, and any monotone transform of it gives the Neyman–Pearson oracle ranking at a fixed null selection level. This distinction is irrelevant for mean-monotone targets, where conventional scores induce essentially the same ranking, but becomes important for interval-valued, variance-driven, multimodal, or multi-condition targets, where prediction-oriented scores can be misaligned with selection power. We study membership-score-based conformal selection and isolate one conformal calibration route, Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection (NCCS), which ranks test scores against confirmed non-target calibration examples. Under null exchangeability, NCCS yields finite-sample valid null p-values, which can be combined with BY under arbitrary dependence or with BH under standard positive-dependence conditions. Experiments support the score principle: membership scores match conventional scores on mean-monotone targets, substantially improve over mean-score selection on variance-driven targets, and, when calibrated by NCCS, trade power for finite-sample null validity in rare-target regimes where direct empirical-FDP thresholding can be anti-conservative. 

# 1 Introduction 

Many scientific and decision-making problems require selecting promising candidates from a large pool before their outcomes are observed. Examples include prioritizing molecules whose activity lies in a desired therapeutic range (G´ omez-Bombarelli et al., 2018), identifying patients likely to benefit from a treatment (Wager and Athey, 2018; K¨ unzel et al., 2019), or screening candidates expected to satisfy a scientific or operational target. False discoveries are costly because selected candidates often trigger expensive follow-up experiments or interventions. At the same time, a valid procedure that selects almost nothing is of limited practical value. The goal is therefore to control false discoveries while retaining high power for detecting truly useful candidates. Conformal selection formalizes this goal by converting candidate-wise uncertainty assessments into p-values and then applying a multiple-testing procedure. Given test covariates {XN +j }mj=1 with unobserved responses {YN +j }mj=1 and a user-specified target region I ⊆ Y , the procedure outputs a selected set 

bS ⊆ { 1, . . . , m }

intended to contain candidates satisfying 

YN +j ∈ I .

Validity is measured by the false discovery rate (FDR) FDR = E

"

#{j : j ∈ bS, Y N +j /∈ I} 

1 ∨ | bS| 

#

,

1

> arXiv:2606.22336v1 [stat.ML] 21 Jun 2026 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores

where a ∨ b = max {a, b }, so the denominator is one when no candidate is selected. Power is measured by the fraction of all target-satisfying candidates that are selected. The usual conformal selection pipeline has two ingredients: a score and a calibration rule. The calibration rule is responsible for validity and the score is responsible for power. Much of the existing methodology inherits scores from conformal prediction, such as signed residuals, conditional quantile scores, or clipped residual constructions. These scores are natural when the target event is a one-sided exceedance and target membership is nearly monotone in a conditional mean. However, they can be structurally misaligned with the scientific selection target. For example, if the target is an interval I = [ a, b ], an extreme value of the conditional mean may be bad rather than good. If the target is variance-driven, the conditional mean may contain no information at all. If several target regions are considered simultaneously, no single mean direction can represent all of them. The central observation of this paper is a principle about which score conformal selection should use . The selection-oriented score is not a residual or a point prediction. It is the target-membership probability 

ηI (x) = P(Y ∈ I | X = x).

This score directly answers the question asked by the selection problem: among candidates with covariate value x, how likely is the response to lie in the target region? Defining the indicator variable 

Z = I{Y ∈ I} =

(

1, if Y ∈ I ,

0, otherwise ,

score construction becomes a binary classification problem for the target event. The Neyman–Pearson lemma then implies that thresholding any monotone transform of ηI (x) is the population oracle rule for maximizing the target selection probability at a fixed null selection level. The value of stating this as a principle is that it makes precise both when it matters and when it does not. When target membership is monotone in a conditional mean, as in a one-sided exceedance target, the membership ranking coincides with the ranking induced by a residual, clipped, or likelihood-ratio score, so the principle recovers existing practice and offers nothing new. The principle becomes useful for targets where membership is not mean-monotone, namely interval, variance-driven, multimodal, and multi-condition targets, where conventional scores are misaligned with the selection objective. We make this alignment boundary precise in Section 4, and our experiments are designed to test it directly rather than to crown a single method. A second question is how to turn a membership score into a selection rule. This is a matter of calibration, and there are several routes. Direct empirical-FDP thresholding (Qin et al., 2025) chooses a threshold from the labeled calibration sample and can be more aggressive, and more powerful, when the score is accurate. Optimized conformal selection (Bai and Jin, 2024) selects among a library of scores while preserving validity. We focus on the conformal route, which converts the membership ranking into null-calibrated conformal p-values, and we show it carries a property the others do not: finite-sample null-p-value validity. Combined with BY, or with BH under standard positive-dependence conditions, this gives an FDR-controlling selection rule. We are explicit that the conformal route is not always the most powerful way to use a membership score; its distinguishing feature is the finite-sample calibration guarantee. We refer to the resulting method as Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection (NCCS). The method first learns a target-membership score g(x), where larger values of g(x) indicate that the candidate with covariate x is more likely to satisfy the target condition Y ∈ I . It then forms p-values by comparing each test score only to calibration points whose observed responses are outside the target region. Let C denote the calibration index set and let 

C0 = {i ∈ C : Yi /∈ I} 

be the subset of observed non-target calibration examples. The null-calibrated p-value is 

pj (g) = 1 + # {i ∈ C 0 : g(Xi) ≥ g(XN +j )}|C 0| + 1 .

2Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

This rank-calibration step is closely related to conformal p-values for outlier detection, where a test score is compared with a reference sample from the null or inlier distribution (Bates et al., 2023), and to class-conditional conformal prediction, where calibration is restricted to a relevant label class or stratum (Vovk, 2012; Ding et al., 2023). Our contribution is to use this null-reference rank construction with a learned target-membership score for general selection regions. Under null exchangeability, this p-value is super-uniform for null test candidates. In this paper we combine these p-values with the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995), yielding a practical FDR-controlling selection rule under standard positive-dependence conditions. More conservative alternatives for arbitrary dependence are discussed in Section 5. This paper makes the principle, rather than any single method, the central object. 1. A target-membership principle for conformal selection. We argue that the natural selection score is the target-membership probability ηI (x) = P(Y ∈ I | X = x), because selection is a binary classification of the target event rather than a prediction of the response level. Thresholding any monotone transform of ηI is the Neyman–Pearson oracle ranking at a fixed null selection level. 2. A score–target alignment characterization. We make precise when conventional prediction-oriented scores suffice and when they fail. For targets that are monotone level sets of a conditional mean, residual, clipped, and likelihood-ratio scores induce the same selection ranking as ηI , so membership scoring offers no new ranking. For interval, variance-driven, multimodal, and multi-condition targets, these scores are misaligned with target membership, and we identify the precise failure mode. Membership scoring is the canonical repair because it depends on the target only through the event Y ∈ I .3. Calibration routes and a finite-sample validity anchor. A membership score can be turned into a selection rule in several ways: a null-calibrated conformal p-value, a direct empirical false-discovery-proportion (FDP) threshold, or a library-based optimized conformal selection. We study this family and isolate one property that distinguishes the conformal route. Null-calibrated conformal selection (NCCS) produces finite-sample valid null p-values under null exchangeability and becomes an FDR-controlling procedure when combined with an appropriate multiple-testing rule. Direct empirical-FDP thresholding controls FDR only asymptotically and can exceed the nominal level when target candidates are rare. 4. Empirical study of the principle. Our experiments are organized around the principle rather than around promoting one method. Membership-score methods, including NCCS and direct thresholding, behave similarly to conventional scores on mean-monotone targets and are much stronger than mean-score selection on variance-driven interval targets. Among the calibration routes, NCCS is more conservative on power but keeps its finite-sample null-calibration advantage precisely in the rare-target regime where direct thresholding inflates. We state plainly what we do not claim. NCCS is not presented as a method that dominates direct Neyman–Pearson thresholding or carefully transformed clipped-score baselines on power. The contribution is the principle and its characterization, with NCCS as the calibration route that carries a finite-sample null-validity guarantee. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 positions the target-membership principle within conformal selection, density-ratio and classification-based selection, and the broader false-discovery-rate literature. Section 3 states the selection problem. Section 4 develops the principle: the membership score and its Neyman–Pearson ranking, the score–target alignment characterization, and the calibration routes. Section 5 establishes the finite-sample validity of the conformal route together with its power-stability behavior. Section 6 reports experiments organized around the principle and the validity gap, and Section 7 discusses limitations and practical use. 3Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

# 2 Related Work 

Conformal selection combines conformal p-values with multiple testing in order to select test candidates while controlling the false discovery rate. It builds on conformal prediction, which produces distribution-free prediction sets with finite-sample validity under exchangeability (Vovk et al., 2005; Lei et al., 2018; Angelopoulos and Bates, 2023). The cfBH method of Jin and Cand` es (2023) constructs conformal p-values for random hypotheses and applies the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure to form a selected set. Subsequent work has extended this idea to richer selection settings, including multi-condition and multivariate problems (Hao et al., 2026; Bai et al., 2025). NCCS follows this conformal multiple testing viewpoint, but changes the score that is calibrated. Instead of using a prediction score that is later adapted to a selection task, NCCS learns a score for the event that the response belongs to the target region. The p-values in NCCS are related to conformal ranks computed against a null or reference sample. In conformal outlier testing, test scores are compared with calibration scores from a reference distribution to obtain conformal p-values for multiple testing (Bates et al., 2023). Class-conditional conformal prediction also uses restricted calibration by computing thresholds within a specified label class or stratum rather than over the full calibration set (Vovk, 2012; Ding et al., 2023). NCCS uses the same rank-based principle for selection. The reference set is the observed non-target calibration subset {i : Yi /∈ I} , and the score is learned to approximate the target-membership probability P(Y ∈ I | X = x). A closely related family of methods is cfBH and its variants. These methods often rely on residual, clipped residual, conditional quantile, or distributional scores. Such scores are natural when the target is one-sided and aligned with a conditional mean or a monotone prediction boundary. They can be less aligned with interval targets, variance-driven targets, multimodal targets, or targets defined by several conditions. NCCS addresses this alignment issue by learning the target-membership probability directly. When the scientific target is well represented by the chosen prediction score, cfBH is often the appropriate method. Recent work has shown that the power of conformal selection depends strongly on the score. For instance, Jin and Cand` es (2023) relate asymptotic power to the AUROC of the score. Bai and Jin (2024) develop optimized conformal selection, which chooses among a library of candidate scores while preserving validity. This direction is complementary to NCCS. If the library contains a good target-membership score, optimized conformal selection can select a score that is close in spirit to the one used by NCCS. The role of NCCS is to identify target membership itself as the population quantity to learn. This score can be used on its own, or included as a candidate score in an optimized conformal selection procedure. The closest conceptual comparison is direct Neyman–Pearson selection (Qin et al., 2025). For the one-sided target I = [ c, ∞), their likelihood ratio is, up to a marginal constant, the ratio of the conditional non-target probability to the conditional target probability, 

R(x; c) = P(Y ≤ c | X = x)

P(Y > c | X = x) .

Thus R(x; c) is a decreasing monotone transform of the target-membership probability P(Y > c | X = x), and selecting small values of R(x; c) is equivalent to selecting large values of the membership probability. Consequently, in one-sided problems, direct Neyman–Pearson selection and NCCS target essentially the same population ranking. The main difference lies in calibration. Direct Neyman–Pearson selection chooses a threshold through an empirical FDP constraint and can be more powerful when the score is accurate. NCCS converts the ranking into null-calibrated conformal p-values and then applies a multiple-testing rule. This can be more conservative, but it retains a conformal p-value interpretation and applies to general target regions without changing the score-learning principle. Table 1 summarizes the comparison. The claim of this paper is not that NCCS uniformly dominates cfBH, optimized conformal selection, or direct Neyman–Pearson thresholding. The claim is that target membership learning gives a direct selection score for general target regions, and that null calibration provides a simple conformal p-value route for using this score. 4Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

Table 1: Conceptual positioning of NCCS relative to close baselines. Method Main score Calibration mechanism Main strength and limitation cfBH (Jin and Cand` es, 2023) Residual, clipped, or prediction-oriented con-formal score Conformal p-values with BH or another FDR rule Simple and classical. Strong for one-sided mean-monotone targets, but can be misaligned for interval or variance-driven targets. OptCS (Bai and Jin, 2024) Optimized score from a candidate library Adaptive conformal se-lection calibration Flexible and potentially strong. Can match NCCS if the membership score is included, but requires a suitable library. Direct Neyman– Pearson (Qin et al., 2025) Likelihood ratio or mem-bership odds score Direct empirical FDP threshold Often powerful for one-sided targets. Can be more aggres-sive, but does not use confor-mal p-values and is typically asymptotic. NCCS (this pa-per) 

ηI (x) = P(Y ∈ I | X =

x)Null-calibrated confor-mal p-values with BH Natural for general target regions and has clean null p-value validity. May be more conservative than direct thresholding. Target membership scores can be learned in several ways. One can fit a binary classifier for the event Y ∈ I ,or estimate the full conditional distribution of Y given X and integrate it over I. This connects NCCS to distributional regression, Bayesian posterior predictive modeling, and conformal Bayesian approaches. Under covariate shift, the null calibration sample may no longer be exchangeable with the null test candidates, and weighted calibration becomes necessary. Weighted conformal p-values provide one route for fixed scores (Jin and Cand` es, 2026). Combining such weighting with target membership learning is a natural extension. Learning the target-membership probability is, formally, a class-probability or density-ratio estimation problem, since by Bayes’ rule the membership odds ηI (x)/(1 − ηI (x)) are proportional to the ratio of the target-conditional to the non-target-conditional covariate densities. Our score step therefore connects to the broad literature on probabilistic classification and density-ratio estimation (Sugiyama et al., 2012, 2008; Zadrozny and Elkan, 2001), and to cost-sensitive and imbalanced classification, since the relevant operating regime is the upper tail of the score where target candidates may be scarce. The cost-sensitive logistic surrogate we use in Section 4.4 is one standard estimator of this ratio, and any calibrated classifier or distributional regressor that targets P(Y ∈ I | X) can be substituted. Viewing the score as a density ratio also clarifies the alignment characterization of Section 4.2: prediction-oriented scores estimate a location functional of the conditional law, which equals a monotone transform of the density ratio only for monotone level-set targets. The selection objective also connects this work to the broader literature on false-discovery-rate control and selective inference. The Benjamini–Hochberg and Benjamini–Yekutieli procedures (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995; Benjamini and Yekutieli, 2001) provide the multiplicity layer used in our method. More generally, adaptive and empirical-Bayes approaches to FDR control, including methods that estimate the proportion of true nulls (Storey, 2002), are relevant whenever target candidates are rare and the null fraction plays an important role. Another related line of work controls false discoveries through constructed negative controls, as in the knockoff filter and its model-X extension (Barber and Cand` e, 2015; 5Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

Cand` es et al., 2018). Our setting is different in mechanism. Rather than constructing knockoff features, conformal selection uses held-out calibration data to form candidate-wise p-values. In NCCS, the p-value is a rank statistic computed against confirmed non-target calibration examples, which gives finite-sample null validity without modeling the null score distribution. Direct empirical-FDP thresholding (Qin et al., 2025) uses the same selection-oriented spirit, but chooses a threshold by estimating the FDP on a labeled calibration sample. The experiments in Section 6 compare these two calibration mechanisms and illustrate the practical trade-off between finite-sample null-calibrated p-values and more aggressive empirical-FDP thresholding. 

# 3 Problem Setup and Conformal Selection 

3.1 Data Split and Goal 

We observe i.i.d. data {(Xi, Y i)}Ni=1 from an unknown distribution PXY over X ×Y ⊆ X × R. A practitioner specifies a target region I ⊂ Y and a target FDR level q ∈ (0 , 1). Define the binary target indicator 

Zi = I{Yi ∈ I} . We write π1 = P(Z = 1) and π0 = P(Z = 0) = 1 − π1 for the marginal probabilities of target and non-target membership, respectively. The labeled data are partitioned into three disjoint subsets, 

D = Dtr 

|{z}  

> ntr samples

∪ Dsc 

|{z}  

> nsc samples

∪ Dcal 

|{z}  

> ncal samples

,

with N = ntr + nsc + ncal . The subset Dtr is used to fit a base predictor, Dsc is used to learn the selection score, and Dcal is used to build conformal p-values. Section 4 gives the details of these roles. The test covariates {XN +j }mj=1 are observed, while their responses {YN +j }mj=1 are not. The goal is to produce a selected set S ⊆ { 1, . . . , m } that controls FDR and has high power. We define FDR( S) = E

 #{j ∈ S : ZN +j = 0 }

1 ∨ | S|



≤ q, Power( S) = E

 #{j ∈ S : ZN +j = 1 }

1 ∨ #{j : ZN +j = 1 }



, (1) where a ∨ b = max {a, b }. The denominator convention makes the ratio well defined when the relevant set is empty. 

3.2 Conformal Selection 

Throughout the main text we use an upper-tail convention. A larger score means stronger evidence that a candidate belongs to the target region. Let A : X × Y → R be a favorable conformal-selection score and let c / ∈ I be a null reference value. Let C denote the index set of the calibration split, so |C| = ncal . The conformal-selection p-value for test candidate j is 

pj = 1 + # {i ∈ C : Ai ≥ A(XN +j , c )}|C| + 1 , Ai = A(Xi, Y i). (2) A small p-value means that the test candidate has an unusually large favorable score relative to the calibration examples. A multiple-testing procedure such as Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) or Benjamini–Yekutieli (BY) (Benjamini and Yekutieli, 2001) then produces the selected set. Some conformal-selection papers use a lower-tail nonconformity score V , where small values are favorable. This is equivalent to the present convention after the sign transformation A = −V . We keep the upper-tail convention because NCCS is based on a membership score g(x) ≈ P(Y ∈ I | X = x), where larger values are naturally more favorable. The conformal p-values used by cfBH rely on two score-level requirements (Jin and Cand` es, 2023). FDR control also depends on the multiple-testing procedure and the dependence structure of the p-values, as discussed in Section 4.3. 6Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

Assumption 1 (Score independence) . The score is constructed using only data independent of Dcal .

Assumption 2 (Regional monotonicity) . For the upper-tail favorable score A, target-side responses are shifted downward relative to null-side responses in the wrapped calibration score. For all x ∈ X ,

A(x, y ) ≤ A(x, y ′) whenever y ∈ I and y′ /∈ I .Regional monotonicity prevents target-side calibration scores from entering the upper-tail count when the test score is evaluated at the null reference c / ∈ I . In the lower-tail nonconformity convention V = −A,the inequality is reversed. This is the standard conformal-selection mechanism for preventing target calibration points from producing artificially small p-values for null test candidates. NCCS takes a simpler route by calibrating the membership score directly against confirmed null calibration examples. 

3.3 AUROC and Power 

The asymptotic power formula of Jin and Cand` es (2023, Proposition 7) shows that, in large samples, power is determined mainly by how well the score separates target examples from non-target examples. Under our upper-tail convention, power is the fraction of target candidates whose scores exceed the population operating threshold: Power → P(A(X, c ) ≥ τ ∗, Z = 1) 

P(Z = 1) . (3) Thus power is controlled by the ranking induced by the score, not by the numerical scale of the p-values themselves. This motivates learning a score whose ranking separates Z = 1 candidates from Z = 0 candidates as well as possible. 

# 4 The Target-Membership Principle 

This section develops the principle. We first identify the target-membership probability as the oracle selection ranking (Section 4.1). We then characterize when conventional prediction-oriented scores realize this ranking and when they fail (Section 4.2). Finally we describe how a learned membership score is calibrated into a selection rule, with the null-calibrated conformal route developed in detail (Sections 4.3 and 4.4). 

4.1 Target-Membership Scores and Oracle Ranking 

The target event induces the binary label 

Z = I{Y ∈ I} .

A powerful score for selection should rank candidates by their probability of having Z = 1. The population target-membership score is 

η(x) = P(Z = 1 | X = x) = P(Y ∈ I | X = x).

Large values of η(x) mean that the candidate is likely to satisfy the target condition. We write π1 = P(Z =1) and π0 = P(Z = 0) for the marginal probabilities of target and non-target membership, respectively. The role of η follows from the Neyman–Pearson lemma. The likelihood ratio for distinguishing target covariates from non-target covariates is Λ( x) = dP X|Z=1 

dP X|Z=0 

(x) = η(x)1 − η(x) · π0

π1

.

Thus Λ( x) is a strictly increasing function of η(x). This monotonicity has a useful Neyman–Pearson interpretation. For any selection region A ⊆ X , the quantity P(X ∈ A | Z = 1) is the probability of selecting a target candidate, whereas P(X ∈ A | Z = 0) is the probability of selecting a non-target candidate. If the latter quantity is constrained to be at most a fixed level α0, the Neyman–Pearson 7Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

lemma shows that thresholding the likelihood ratio Λ( x) maximizes the former quantity. Because Λ( x)is a strictly increasing function of η(x), thresholding the target-membership probability gives the same population-optimal ranking. Hence the oracle membership ranking is optimal pointwise along the ROC curve, rather than only after averaging performance through AUROC. 

Proposition 1 (Oracle ranking at fixed null selection level) . Fix any α0 ∈ [0 , 1] . Among all covariate-based selection regions A ⊆ X satisfying 

P(X ∈ A | Z = 0) ≤ α0,

the region that maximizes the target selection probability 

P(X ∈ A | Z = 1) 

is an upper level set of the likelihood ratio dP X|Z=1 /dP X|Z=0 . Since this likelihood ratio is a strictly increasing function of the target-membership probability η(x) = P(Z = 1 | X = x), the same optimal regions are obtained by selecting large values of η(x). Equivalently, any strictly increasing transformation of η gives the same oracle ranking. Proof. See Appendix B.3. Proposition 1 is a fixed-level Neyman–Pearson statement. It says that, if we fix the allowed probability of selecting a non-target candidate, then thresholding the oracle membership score maximizes the probability of selecting a target candidate. A BH rule does not fix this operating level in advance. Instead, it chooses a data-dependent threshold from the conformal p-values. Nevertheless, the proposition identifies the population ranking that one would like the p-values to reflect. Section 5 then uses a local stability condition to relate perturbations of this oracle ranking to perturbations of BH power. 

4.2 When Conventional Scores Suffice, and When They Fail 

Proposition 1 identifies ηI as the oracle ranking, but it does not by itself argue that one must learn 

ηI rather than reuse a prediction-oriented score. Whether a conventional score suffices depends on the geometry of the target region. This subsection makes the boundary precise. Let s : X → R be any covariate score, and say that s is selection-aligned with the target I if it induces the oracle ranking, that is, if there is a strictly increasing function ψ with s(x) = ψ(ηI (x)) for PX -almost every x. Two scores that are strictly increasing transformations of each other produce identical conformal p-values in (4) and hence identical selected sets, because the p-value depends on the score only through its induced order. Alignment is therefore the relevant equivalence. The first observation is that for an important class of targets the conventional scores are already aligned, so the principle changes nothing. 

Proposition 2 (Mean-monotone targets: equivalence) . Suppose the conditional law of Y | X = x has the form Y = μ(x) + σ ε with ε ⊥ X, fixed scale σ > 0, and continuous error CDF Fε. Let the target be the one-sided region I = [ c, ∞). Then 

ηI (x) = P(Y ≥ c | X = x) = 1 − Fε

 c−μ(x)

> σ



,

which is a strictly increasing function of μ(x). Consequently the conditional mean score smean (x) = μ(x),the signed residual score, and the likelihood-ratio score of Qin et al. (2025) are all selection-aligned with I,and all induce the same NCCS selected set as ηI .Proof. See Appendix B.4. The proposition explains why residual and clipped-residual scores work well on one-sided exceedance targets, and why direct Neyman–Pearson selection, cfBH, and membership scoring coincide there at the 8Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

population level. In this regime the membership principle is a reinterpretation rather than a new method, and we expect no empirical gap. Our upper-tail experiment in Section 6.2 confirms this. The principle becomes substantive precisely when membership is not monotone in a single conditional mean. Three common target geometries break alignment. 

Interval and variance-driven targets. Let Y = μ(x) + σ(x)ε and let the target be an interval I = [ c1, c 2]. Then 

ηI (x) = Fε

 c2−μ(x)

> σ(x)



− Fε

 c1−μ(x)

> σ(x)



,

which is not monotone in μ(x): membership increases as μ(x) moves toward the interval center and decreases as it moves away, and it depends on the conditional scale σ(x). In the purely variance-driven case μ(x) ≡ 0 with symmetric errors, ηI (x) is a function of σ(x) alone and is strictly decreasing in it, so the conditional mean score carries no information about target membership. Any score that is a function of μ(x) alone is then misaligned, and the gap is maximal. 

Multimodal targets. If Y | X = x is multimodal, an interval covering one mode has membership probability governed by the mass of that mode, which need not be monotone in any summary location statistic. A residual or quantile score calibrated to the global conditional distribution does not track the relevant modal mass. 

Multi-condition targets. If the target is a conjunction I = {y : y(1) ∈ I 1, . . . , y (K) ∈ I K } for vector responses, the membership probability is a joint event probability, and no single prediction direction represents all coordinates simultaneously. These cases share a structural cause. Prediction-oriented scores summarize the conditional distribution through a location functional, whereas target membership is a functional of the conditional distribution over the set I. When the target is a monotone level set of the location functional, the two agree (Proposition 2); otherwise they need not. The target-membership score is the canonical repair because it depends on the target only through the event Y ∈ I and therefore remains aligned by construction for any I. This is the content of the principle, and it is also a concrete, testable prediction: membership scoring should be indistinguishable from conventional scores on mean-monotone targets and strictly better when alignment fails. Section 6 tests both halves. The principle has two axes that organize the rest of the paper, and Figure 1 places the three methods we compare on them. The vertical axis is the choice of score, the subject of the alignment characterization just given. The horizontal axis is the calibration mechanism, the subject of the finite-sample validity results in Section 5. Reading off the grid, cfBH and NCCS share a column: both calibrate through null-referenced conformal p-values and differ only in the score. NCCS and direct Neyman–Pearson selection share a row: both use the membership score ηI and differ only in calibration. The next subsections develop the conformal calibration column in detail. A learned membership score g follows the same upper-tail convention. Larger values of g(x) indicate stronger evidence that Y ∈ I . Therefore, a test candidate should receive a small p-value when its score 

g(XN +j ) is unusually large relative to the scores of non-target calibration examples. 

4.3 Null-Calibrated Conformal P-Values 

The target-membership score gives a ranking, but it is not a p-value by itself. To obtain a valid p-value for selection, NCCS calibrates the score against calibration examples whose responses are observed to be outside the target region. Let 

C0 = {i ∈ D cal : Yi /∈ I} , N0 = |C 0|.

For a fixed membership score g, the null-calibrated conformal p-value for test candidate j is 

pj (g) = 1 + # {i ∈ C 0 : g(Xi) ≥ g(XN +j )}

N0 + 1 . (4) 9Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores   

> cfBH
> residual or clipped score, conformal calibration
> NCCS (this paper)
> membership score, conformal calibration
> Qin-NP
> membership score, direct threshold
> Calibration mechanism
> Conformal p-values + BH
> (finite-sample valid)
> Direct FDP threshold
> (asymptotic)
> Prediction-oriented score Membership score η(x)
> Score

Figure 1: The target-membership principle (rows) and the calibration mechanism (columns) place the three methods we compare. cfBH and NCCS share a column: both calibrate through null-referenced conformal p-values, and differ only in the score. NCCS and direct Neyman–Pearson selection (Qin-NP) share a row: both use the membership score ηI , and differ only in calibration. The prediction-score, direct-threshold cell has no standard method. This figure complements the feature comparison in Table 1. Small values of pj (g) mean that the test candidate has a larger membership score than most observed non-target calibration examples. This construction uses the observed non-target calibration subset as the reference distribution for null candidates. If test candidate j is null, meaning YN +j /∈ I , and the score g is fixed independently of the calibration and test points, then g(XN +j ) is exchangeable with {g(Xi) : i ∈ C 0} under null exchangeability. Hence the rank in (4) is super-uniform for null candidates. This is the finite-sample validity property needed before applying a multiple-testing procedure. The rank construction is related to conformal p-values for outlier testing (Bates et al., 2023) and to class-conditional conformal calibration (Ding et al., 2023). NCCS uses the same reference-set idea for a different purpose. The reference set is the observed non-target calibration subset, and the ranked score is learned to approximate the target-membership probability. 

Assumption 3 (Null exchangeability) . Conditional on Y /∈ I , the null calibration covariates {Xi : i ∈ C 0}

and any null test covariate XN +j | YN +j /∈ I are exchangeable. 

Theorem 1 (Null validity of the NCCS p-values) . Let g be trained on Dtr ∪ D sc , independently of Dcal .Under Assumption 3, for any null test candidate j and any t ∈ [0 , 1] :

(a) Conservative p-value. 

P{pj (g) ≤ t | YN +j /∈ I} ≤ t. 

(b) Exact p-value with randomized tie-breaking. Let Uj ∼ Uniform[0 , 1] and define 

˜pj (g) = #{i ∈ C 0 : g(Xi) > g (XN +j )} + Uj

 1 + # {i ∈ C 0 : g(Xi) = g(XN +j )}

N0 + 1 .

Then P{˜pj (g) ≤ t | YN +j /∈ I , N 0} = t for all t ∈ [0 , 1] .Proof. See Appendix B.1. 

Corollary 1 (FDR control) . Apply a multiple-testing procedure to the p-values in (4) . Under Assumption 1 and Assumption 3, the Benjamini–Yekutieli procedure controls FDR ≤ q under arbitrary dependence among 

10 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

p-values. The Benjamini–Hochberg procedure controls FDR ≤ q when the joint null p-values satisfy positive regression dependence on subsets (PRDS) in the sense of Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001). Proof. See Appendix B.2. 

Remark 1 (Why BH requires an additional dependence condition) . The null-calibrated p-values share the same null calibration set. Theorem 1 gives marginal super-uniformity for each null p-value, but it does not imply arbitrary-dependence FDR control for BH. Marginal super-uniformity is sufficient for the Benjamini–Yekutieli procedure under arbitrary dependence. The more powerful Benjamini–Hochberg procedure requires an additional dependence condition, such as PRDS. Regional monotonicity is not required for the null-calibrated p-value in (4) . That condition is needed for standard cfBH p-values based on full conformal ranks, where the score is evaluated at a null threshold and compared with all calibration scores. NCCS instead compares the raw membership score only with observed non-target calibration scores. 

4.4 Learning the Score and the NCCS Algorithm 

NCCS estimates the target-membership ranking by treating the target event as a binary label. On the score-learning split, define 

Zi = I{Yi ∈ I} .

The score-learning task is then a binary classification problem with labels Zi. A learned membership score 

g(x) should be large for covariates that are likely to satisfy the target condition and small for covariates that are likely to be null, or non-target, examples. This follows the upper-tail convention introduced in Section 4.1. The score must be learned independently of the calibration set used to compute p-values. We enforce this by a three-way split, 

D = Dtr ∪ D sc ∪ D cal .

The predictor-training set Dtr is used to fit a base prediction model when such a model is needed. The score-learning set Dsc is used to learn bg. The calibration set Dcal is reserved for p-value computation. This separation ensures that the learned score can be treated as fixed when the calibration scores are ranked. A natural way to learn bg is a cost-sensitive logistic surrogate. With the convention that larger scores favor target membership, define 

bLmem (g) = 1

n+sc 

X

> i∈D sc :Zi=1

log(1 + e−g(Xi)) + λn−

> sc

X

> i∈D sc :Zi=0

log(1 + eg(Xi)), (5) where n+sc = |{ i ∈ D sc : Zi = 1 }| , n− 

> sc

= |{ i ∈ D sc : Zi = 0 }| , and λ > 0 controls the relative cost assigned to null examples. The population minimizer of this surrogate is 

hλ(x) = log 

 π0η(x)

λπ 1(1 − η(x)) 



. (6) For each fixed λ > 0, this function is strictly increasing in η(x). Thus the surrogate learns the same population ranking as the oracle membership score. One may also use a pairwise ranking loss, 

bLrank (g) = 1

n+sc n−

> sc

X

> i∈D sc :Zi=1

X

> l∈D sc :Zl=0

log  1 + eg(Xl)−g(Xi),

which directly encourages target examples to have larger scores than null examples. In our experiments, we use gradient-boosted trees as the membership classifier because they handle nonlinear and heteroskedastic structure well. 11 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores Labeled source data                                        

> {(Xi, Y i)}Ni=1
> Three-way split
> Dtr ,Dsc ,Dcal
> Training split
> Dtr
> Score-learning split
> Dsc
> Calibration split
> Dcal
> Optional predictor / representation training Membership labels
> Zi=1{Yi∈ I}
> Learn target-membership score ˆg(x)≈P(Y∈ I | X=x)Null calibration subset
> C0={i∈ D cal :Yi/∈ I}
> Null scores
> {ˆg(Xi) : i∈ C 0}
> Test candidates
> {XN+j}mj=1
> Candidate scores ˆg(XN+j)Null-calibrated upper-tail p-values
> pj= 1 + P
> i∈C 01{ˆg(Xi)≥ˆg(XN+j)}|C 0|+ 1 ,j= 1 , . . . , m
> Apply BH Selected candidates
> bS={j: candidate jis selected }

Figure 2: Schematic illustration of null-calibrated conformal selection (NCCS) . The labeled data are split into an optional training subset Dtr , a score-learning subset Dsc , and a calibration subset Dcal . A target-membership score ˆg(x) ≈ P(Y ∈ I | X = x) is learned from membership labels Zi = 1{Yi ∈ I} ,null calibration uses only points with Yi /∈ I , and test candidates are selected by applying the Benjamini– Hochberg procedure to null-calibrated upper-tail p-values. After learning bg, NCCS forms the null calibration subset 

C0 = {i ∈ D cal : Yi /∈ I} , N0 = |C 0|.

For each test candidate, NCCS computes the upper-tail null-calibrated p-value in (4) . The final selected set is obtained by applying a multiple-testing rule to these p-values. In our implementation we use BH, with BY as a conservative alternative when an arbitrary-dependence guarantee is required. Figure 2 gives 12 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

Algorithm 1 NCCS (Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection) 

Require: Labeled data D, test covariates {XN +j }mj=1 , target region I, FDR level q ∈ (0 , 1).  

> 1:

Split D into Dtr , Dsc , and Dcal . 

> 2:

Use Dtr to fit any required base prediction model.  

> 3:

Form binary labels Zi = I{Yi ∈ I} for i ∈ D sc . 

> 4:

Learn a target-membership score bg : X → R using (5) , a ranking loss, or another binary classification method.  

> 5:

Form the null calibration subset 

C0 = {i ∈ D cal : Yi /∈ I} , N0 = |C 0|. 

> 6:

for j = 1 , . . . , m do  

> 7:

Compute 

pj (bg) = 1 + # {i ∈ C 0 : bg(Xi) ≥ bg(XN +j )}

N0 + 1 . 

> 8:

Apply BH at level q to {pj (bg)}mj=1 . 

> 9:

return the selected set bS.a schematic overview of NCCS, and Algorithm 1 gives the full step-by-step procedure. This construction shares its population oracle with the direct Neyman–Pearson selection approach of Qin et al. (2025). Both approaches identify η(x) = P(Z = 1 | X = x), or equivalently the target-versus-null likelihood ratio, as the fixed-level oracle ranking score. The difference is operational. Qin et al. estimate a likelihood-ratio model and apply a direct threshold rule, whereas NCCS uses the learned membership score through null-calibrated conformal p-values followed by a multiple-testing step. 

Remark 2 (Split sizes and cross-fitting) . The three-way split trades sample efficiency for a simple validity argument. A typical balanced choice is ntr ≈ nsc ≈ ncal ≈ N/ 3, with adjustments depending on whether base prediction, score learning, or calibration requires more data. Cross-fitting can improve sample efficiency, but it complicates the exact null-exchangeability argument because different calibration and test scores may be produced by models trained on different data. We therefore use the three-way split as the default construction when exact finite-sample validity is the main requirement. The paper focuses on the single-target setting in the main theory and experiments. Extensions to multiple target regions or structured target definitions can be handled by defining the corresponding membership labels and calibrating each claim against an appropriate non-target set. 

# 5 Validity and Power Analysis 

Sections 4.3 and 4.4 established the validity side of NCCS. Under null exchangeability and independent score learning, the null-calibrated conformal p-values are super-uniform for null candidates. They can therefore be combined with a multiple-testing procedure to control FDR under the usual dependence conditions. We now turn to power. The goal is to explain how the power of NCCS depends on the quality of the learned target-membership score and on the finite size of the null calibration set. The analysis separates two sources of error. The first is the error from learning a score that approximates the oracle target-membership ranking. The second is the error from estimating the null score distribution with finitely many observed non-target calibration examples. This separation is useful because the two errors are controlled by different data splits. 

Definition 1 (Selection procedure Φ g,q ). For a membership score g : X → R, let Φg,q denote the procedure that computes the null-calibrated p-values 

pj (g) = 1 + # {i ∈ C 0 : g(Xi) ≥ g(XN +j )}

N0 + 1 13 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

and applies a multiple-testing rule at level q. In the power analysis below, the rule is the Benjamini– Hochberg procedure unless stated otherwise. We write Power(Φ g,q ) and Power( g) interchangeably when q

and the data split are clear from context. 

5.1 Oracle Stability 

NCCS is built around a learned target-membership score. The ideal score would rank candidates in the same order as η(x) = P(Y ∈ I | X = x). We denote such an oracle ranking score by g⋆. The score g⋆ may be any strictly increasing transformation of η, because the null-calibrated p-values depend only on the ordering of the scores. The main question is what happens when the learned score bg is close to g⋆, but not exactly equal to it. If the score error is small and the population selection boundary is stable, then replacing g⋆ by bg should only slightly change the selected set and its power. The following assumption records the regularity needed for this conclusion. 

Assumption 4 (Local stability of the population BH boundary) . For z ∈ { 0, 1}, define the upper-tail score distribution ¯F g⋆ 

> z

(τ ) = P{g⋆(X) ≥ τ | Z = z}.

Let τ ∗ 

> g⋆

denote the population BH threshold induced by the oracle score g⋆. The following conditions hold in a neighborhood of τ ∗ 

> g⋆

and g⋆.(i) The null and target score distributions have bounded densities near τ ∗ 

> g⋆

.(ii) The population false discovery proportion curve FDP g⋆ (τ ) = π0 ¯F g⋆ 

> 0

(τ )

π0 ¯F g⋆ 

> 0

(τ ) + π1 ¯F g⋆ 

> 1

(τ )crosses the target level stably at τ ∗ 

> g⋆

. In particular, 

ddτ FDP g⋆ (τ )  

> τ=τ∗
> g⋆

≥ c0 > 0.

(iii) The population power functional is locally Lipschitz with respect to score perturbations: 

|P (g) − P (g⋆)| ≤ CL∥g − g⋆∥L2(PX )

for all scores g sufficiently close to g⋆.The first condition rules out a large pile of examples with scores almost equal to the oracle threshold. The second condition rules out an unstable boundary where the population FDP curve only touches the target level and small perturbations can move the threshold substantially. The third condition states the resulting local stability of power. Together, these conditions exclude pathological cases in which an arbitrarily small score perturbation can move a large fraction of candidates across the selection boundary. 

Theorem 2 (Asymptotic oracle stability) . Suppose bg → g⋆ uniformly as nsc → ∞ , where g⋆ is a strictly increasing transformation of η. Suppose also that Assumption 4 holds at g⋆ and that the number of test candidates m is fixed. Then 

Power( bg) → Power(Φ η,q )

as nsc , n cal → ∞ .Proof. See Appendix B.5. 14 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

The theorem says that NCCS is stable to consistent score learning. If the learned score converges to an oracle ranking score, then the power of the learned-score procedure converges to the power of the oracle procedure. The validity of NCCS comes from the null-calibrated conformal p-values, while its power depends on how well the learned score approximates the oracle target-membership ranking. The fixed-m condition keeps the statement simple. The same idea can be extended to growing test sets when the score approximation remains uniform over the test pool and the null calibration error is controlled. We keep the main statement in the fixed-m regime to emphasize the central point. Small errors in the learned membership ranking lead to small changes in BH power under a stable population boundary. 

5.2 Power Loss Decomposition 

The asymptotic result says that the learned-score procedure approaches the oracle procedure. The next result gives the corresponding finite-sample message. The power loss has a score-estimation term and a null-calibration term. 

Corollary 2 (Power loss decomposition) . Fix a distribution P for which Assumption 4 holds at an oracle ranking g⋆. The empirical procedure Φbg,q satisfies 

Power(Φ g⋆,q , P ) − Power(Φ bg,q , P ) ≤ C∥bg − g⋆∥L2(PX ) + Op(N −1/20 ).

If g⋆ is a strictly increasing transformation of η, then Power(Φ g⋆,q , P ) = Power(Φ η,q , P ).Proof. See Appendix B.6. The term ∥bg − g⋆∥L2(PX ) is the score-estimation error. It depends on the score-learning split and measures how well the learned score approximates the oracle membership ranking. The term Op(N −1/20 ) is the null-calibration error. It remains even when the oracle score is known, because the null score distribution is estimated from finitely many observed non-target calibration examples. Since N0 ≈ ncal π0, this term shrinks as the calibration split grows, provided the marginal probability of the null event is not too small. This decomposition explains the modular structure of NCCS. Score learning is responsible for power because it determines how well target candidates are ranked above null candidates. Null calibration is responsible for p-value validity because it estimates the score distribution under the null event Y /∈ I .The two parts interact through the final multiple-testing step, but their statistical roles are distinct. 

5.3 Rate Consequences 

The decomposition has an immediate rate consequence. If the learned score converges to an oracle ranking function at rate rnsc in L2(PX ), then the NCCS power loss is bounded by a score-estimation term of order rnsc plus the null-calibration term of order n−1/2cal . For example, under standard Sobolev smoothness conditions and balanced sample splitting, a nonparametric estimator yields the usual rate n−s/ (2 s+d)sc , up to logarithmic factors (Stone, 1982; Tsybakov, 2009). We state this consequence formally in Appendix A. 

# 6 Experiments 

The experiments test the principle of Section 4, not the superiority of a single method. The alignment characterization makes two falsifiable predictions. First, on mean-monotone targets, membership scoring should behave similarly to conventional prediction-oriented scores, because Proposition 2 shows they induce the same ranking at the population level. Second, on targets where membership is not mean-monotone, such as variance-driven intervals, membership-score methods should outperform mean-score methods. We test both predictions directly. 15 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

Separately, among the calibration routes for a membership score, we examine the finite-sample validity property that distinguishes the conformal route. We compare null-calibrated BH against a direct empirical-FDP threshold that uses the same learned membership score, so that any difference reflects the calibration mechanism rather than the score. We therefore compare against clipped conformal BH (cfBH), a direct Neyman–Pearson-style thresholding rule, mean-score null-calibrated BH, and oracle versions that use the true membership probability available in the synthetic experiments. The first upper-tail experiment is a mean-monotone setting and tests the first prediction. The second interval experiment is variance-driven and tests the second. The final experiments vary the calibration budget and the target frequency to quantify the finite-sample validity gap between null-calibrated BH and direct empirical-FDP thresholding. 

6.1 Experimental Design 

We use two synthetic settings with known data-generating mechanisms. In both settings, 

X ∼ N (0 , I 6), Y = μ(X) + σ(X)ε, ε ∼ N (0 , 1) .

The first setting is an upper-tail, mean-driven problem. We set 

μ(x) = 1 .2 sin( πx 1) + 0 .8x2 − 0.4x3, σ(x) = 0 .45 + 0 .25(1 + e−2x4 )−1,

and use the target region I = [0 .5, ∞). Here the conditional mean is already highly informative for target membership, so this setting favors clipped cfBH and direct thresholding. The second setting is a variance-driven interval problem. We set 

μ(x) = 0 .15 sin( x1), σ(x) = 0 .10 + 1 .45(1 + e−2.6x2 )−1,

and use the target region I = [ −0.35 , 0.35]. In this setting, the conditional mean carries little information about whether the response lies in the interval. The relevant signal is the conditional variance, so the experiment tests whether learning ηI (x) = P(Y ∈ I | X = x) is useful beyond mean-score selection. Unless otherwise stated, all methods use 

ntr = 1000 , nscore = 800 , ncal = 800 , m = 300 ,

with target FDR level q = 0 .10. The reported FDP and power are averages over independent replications. Power is the fraction of all target candidates in the test pool that are selected. The methods are as follows. 

• cfBH-clip is the standard clipped cfBH baseline for the upper-tail target, using a gradient-boosted mean model. Its clipped score has the form M I{Y ≥ c} − bμ(X) on calibration points and −bμ(X) on test candidates. 

• cfBH-central is an interval-specific transformed cfBH baseline. For I = [ −a, a ], we set T (Y ) = −| Y |,so that Y ∈ [−a, a ] is equivalent to T (Y ) ≥ − a, and then apply the clipped cfBH construction to 

T (Y ). 

• Mean-Null-BH is a null-calibrated BH procedure using a simple prediction-oriented score. It uses a GBM mean score in the upper-tail setting and a centrality score based on the absolute mean in the interval setting. 

• Qin-NP is a direct Neyman–Pearson-style empirical-FDP thresholding rule. It uses the same learned target-membership score as NCCS, but chooses the score threshold using the labeled calibration sample to satisfy an empirical FDP constraint. 

• NCCS-BH and NCCS-BY use the proposed null-calibrated conformal p-values with a GBM classifier trained on Zi = I{Yi ∈ I} , followed by BH or BY. 16 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

Table 2: Upper-tail mean-driven target I = [0 .5, ∞). Results are averaged over 300 replications with 

q = 0 .10. This setting is favorable to clipped cfBH and direct Neyman–Pearson selection.                      

> Method FDP Power Avg. selected Oracle-BH 0.061 0.583 68.6 cfBH-clip 0.099 0.568 69.6 Qin-NP 0.100 0.546 66.8 Mean-Null-BH 0.062 0.441 52.1 NCCS-BH 0.057 0.404 47.5 NCCS-BY 0.002 0.016 2.0

Table 3: Variance-driven interval target I = [ −0.35 , 0.35]. Results are averaged over 300 replications with 

q = 0 .10. cfBH-central applies clipped cfBH to T (Y ) = −| Y |, so that Y ∈ [−a, a ] becomes the one-sided event T (Y ) ≥ − a.                     

> Method FDP Power Avg. selected Qin-NP 0.104 0.457 70.3 cfBH-central 0.101 0.429 66.4 Oracle-BH 0.054 0.354 51.9 NCCS-BH 0.052 0.288 42.4 NCCS-BY 0.000 0.001 0.2 Mean-Null-BH 0.000 0.000 0.0

• Oracle-BH is the same NCCS-BH procedure using the true membership probability ηI (x), which is available analytically in the synthetic experiments. For all null-calibrated methods, larger scores are more favorable and p-values are upper-tail null ranks as in (4). 

6.2 Upper-Tail Mean-Driven Target 

This experiment tests the first prediction of the alignment characterization. Because the target I = [0 .5, ∞)is mean-monotone, Proposition 2 says the membership ranking and the mean-based ranking coincide, so membership scoring should match, not beat, the specialized baselines. Table 2 bears this out. The mean-aligned methods are strong: cfBH-clip achieves power 0 .568 at mean FDP 0 .099, and Qin-NP achieves power 0 .546 at mean FDP 0 .100. NCCS-BH is more conservative, with mean FDP 0 .057 and power 0 .404. The power gap here is a calibration effect, not a score effect. All of these methods use essentially the same ranking, as the characterization predicts; the differences come from how aggressively each calibration rule sets its threshold, with null-calibrated BH the most conservative. The takeaway is the intended one: on mean-monotone targets the principle recovers existing practice and offers no power advantage. NCCS-BY has almost no power in this experiment. This is also expected. BY multiplies the BH threshold by 1 /H m, where Hm = Pmk=1 k−1. At m = 300, this reduces the operative FDR level by a factor of about 6.3. Together with the discrete resolution 1 /(N0 + 1) of the null-calibrated p-values, this leaves very few possible rejections. We therefore view BY as a conservative fallback under arbitrary dependence, while BH is the practical procedure when the usual positive-dependence condition is plausible. 

6.3 Variance-Driven Interval Target 

Table 3 shows the value and the limitation of the membership-score approach. Mean-Null-BH collapses because the conditional mean is nearly uninformative about interval membership. NCCS-BH attains power 0 .288 with mean FDP 0 .052, compared with Oracle-BH power 0 .354 and mean FDP 0 .054. Thus 17 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

Table 4: Effect of the calibration size ncal on finite-sample validity. The target is I = [ −0.35 , 0.35], with 

nscore = 800, m = 300, q = 0 .10, and 200 replications. Both methods use the same GBM membership classifier. Entries with mean FDP above the nominal level are marked ∗.                         

> NCCS-BH Qin-NP
> ncal FDP Power FDP Power 50 0.004 0.016 0.109 ∗0.422 100 0.027 0.141 0.110 ∗0.460 200 0.033 0.187 0.103 ∗0.450 400 0.042 0.240 0.103 ∗0.459 800 0.049 0.277 0.104 ∗0.459

the learned membership score tracks the oracle null-calibrated benchmark reasonably well while retaining a conservative FDR profile. Oracle-BH should not be read as a global power upper bound. It is an oracle only within the NCCS null-calibrated-BH mechanism. Qin-NP uses a different threshold choice and operates close to the empirical FDP boundary, achieving power 0 .457 with mean FDP 0 .104. The hand-engineered cfBH-central baseline is also very strong. After transforming the interval event into the one-sided event T (Y ) = −| Y | ≥ − a, it achieves power 0 .429 with mean FDP 0 .101. These comparisons show that NCCS is most useful when a good target-specific transformation is not obvious or when finite-sample null calibration is the main requirement. 

6.4 Finite-Sample Validity at Small Calibration Sizes 

The first two experiments show that direct Neyman–Pearson thresholding can be more powerful than NCCS-BH when the membership score is accurate and the calibration set is large. This subsection isolates the complementary advantage of NCCS-BH. The null-calibrated p-values give a finite-sample null-p-value guarantee and FDR control under the conditions of Corollary 1, whereas Qin-NP relies on a direct empirical-FDP threshold. Both methods use the same GBM membership classifier, so the comparison isolates the calibration mechanism rather than the score quality. We use the variance-driven interval target I = [ −0.35 , 0.35] from Section 6.3, fix nscore = 800 and m = 300, and vary ncal ∈ { 50 , 100 , 200 , 400 , 800 } at q = 0 .10 over 200 replications. Table 4 reports the results. Table 4 shows the expected validity-power trade-off. NCCS-BH keeps mean FDP below q = 0 .10 at every calibration size. At very small calibration sizes, however, it is conservative because the null-rank p-values have coarse resolution. At ncal = 50, the smallest attainable p-value is about 1 /(N0 + 1), and the BH threshold rarely admits discoveries. Qin-NP is much more powerful, but its mean FDP is slightly above the nominal level at all calibration sizes. This illustrates the difference between finite-sample null-calibrated p-values and a direct threshold chosen from a finite calibration sample. The exceedance in Table 4 is modest because the interval target has moderate frequency. We next stress the problem by varying the target frequency through the interval half-width. We fix nscore = 800, ncal = 300, 

m = 300, and q = 0 .10, and run 300 replications. Table 5 reports the mean FDP, the exceedance frequency Pr {FDP > q } across replications, and power. Table 5 shows that NCCS-BH remains below the nominal mean FDP level across all target frequencies. Qin-NP remains more powerful, but its mean FDP is above q in every row. The inflation is most pronounced when the target event is rare. At π1 = 0 .24, the mean FDP is 0 .170, a 70% relative overshoot of the nominal level. This is a practically important regime because selection problems are often most useful when target candidates are scarce. The price paid by NCCS-BH is conservative power, especially for rare targets and small calibration sets. Taken together, the experiments support the principle and locate the role of the conformal calibration 18 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

Table 5: Validity as the target frequency π1 varies in the variance-driven interval setting. We use 

nscore = 800, ncal = 300, m = 300, q = 0 .10, and 300 replications. Both methods use the same GBM membership classifier. “Exc.” is the fraction of replications with empirical FDP > q . Entries with mean FDP above the nominal level are marked ∗.                                           

> NCCS-BH Qin-NP
> π1¯N0FDP Exc. Power FDP Exc. Power 0.24 227 0.010 0.02 0.003 0.170 ∗0.38 0.028 0.36 191 0.028 0.14 0.049 0.127 ∗0.60 0.211 0.50 150 0.042 0.06 0.314 0.103 ∗0.50 0.516 0.61 116 0.034 0.02 0.447 0.101 ∗0.51 0.625 0.74 79 0.024 0.00 0.492 0.104 ∗0.54 0.699

route. The two predictions of the alignment characterization both hold. On the mean-monotone target, membership scoring matches the mean-aligned baselines rather than beating them, consistent with the equivalence in Proposition 2. On the variance-driven interval target, mean-score selection collapses while membership-score methods, including NCCS and direct thresholding, retain substantial power. The empirical gap appears where the characterization predicts it should, and is largely absent where it predicts no gap. Among the calibration routes for a membership score, the conformal route is more conservative on power but is the one with finite-sample null-valid p-values, and it keeps mean FDP below the nominal level in the rare-target regime where the direct empirical-FDP threshold overshoots. We therefore do not present NCCS as a universal power winner. Its place is as the finite-sample-valid calibration route for the target-membership principle, most useful when no target-specific transformation is obvious and when finite-sample null-calibrated p-values matter more than spending the entire empirical FDP budget. 

# 7 Discussion and Conclusion 

This paper argued for a principle: conformal selection is a classification problem for the target event, so the natural score is the target-membership probability ηI (x) = P(Y ∈ I | X = x), and thresholding any monotone transform of it is the Neyman–Pearson oracle ranking. The value of the principle is sharpened by knowing its boundary. For targets that are monotone level sets of a conditional mean, membership scoring coincides with residual, clipped, and likelihood-ratio scores and offers nothing new (Proposition 2). For interval, variance-driven, multimodal, and multi-condition targets, conventional scores are misaligned and membership scoring is the canonical repair, because it depends on the target only through the event 

Y ∈ I .A membership score can be calibrated into a selection rule in several ways, and we studied this family rather than advocating a single method. Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection (NCCS) is the conformal route: it converts the membership ranking into rank p-values against confirmed non-target examples and applies a multiple-testing procedure. Its distinguishing property is finite-sample FDR control under null exchangeability. Direct empirical-FDP thresholding can be more powerful when the score is accurate, but controls FDR only asymptotically and, as our experiments show, can exceed the nominal level when target candidates are rare. NCCS is therefore not a universal power winner; it is the member of the family with a finite-sample null-validity guarantee. The theory separates validity from power. Null exchangeability and independent score learning give finite-sample super-uniformity of the null-calibrated p-values. The Benjamini–Hochberg procedure is the practical version studied in our experiments under standard positive-dependence conditions. Power then depends on the quality of the learned membership score, and our analysis relates the loss from the oracle ranking to score estimation and null calibration errors. Several limitations remain. Membership-score learning can be difficult when the target event is rare, and distributional or Bayesian predictive models may be more sample efficient in such cases. The present theory 19 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

also assumes null exchangeability, so the observed non-target calibration examples must represent the null test candidates. Under covariate shift, label shift, or compound shift, this null reference distribution may change, and the rank calibration in NCCS may need to be modified by importance weights. This suggests a weighted version of NCCS, connected to recent conformal Bayes work on predictive tilting and weighted conformal calibration under distribution shift (Choi, 2026). Developing weighted NCCS with finite-sample or robustness-style guarantees is left for future work. In summary, the target-membership principle gives a single, transparent answer to which score conformal selection should use, with a clean characterization of when it matters. NCCS realizes the principle through a calibration route whose strength is a finite-sample validity guarantee for target-aware selection, rather than a claim of universal power dominance. 

# References 

A. N. Angelopoulos and S. Bates. Conformal prediction: A gentle introduction. Foundations and Trends ®

in Machine Learning , 16(4):494–591, 2023. T. Bai and Y. Jin. Optimized conformal selection: Powerful selective inference after conformity score optimization, 2024. Preprint arXiv:2411.17983 .T. Bai, Y. Zhao, X. Yu, and A. Y. Yang. Multivariate conformal selection. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2025. R. F. Barber and E. J. Cand` e. Controlling the false discovery rate via knockoffs. The Annals of Statistics ,43(5):2055–2085, 2015. S. Bates, E. Cand` es, L. Lei, Y. Romano, and M. Sesia. Testing for outliers with conformal p-values. The Annals of Statistics , 51(1):149–178, 2023. Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple hypothesis testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B , 57(1):289–300, 1995. Y. Benjamini and D. Yekutieli. The control of the false discovery rate in multiple testing under dependency. 

The Annals of Statistics , 29(4):1165–1188, 2001. E. Cand` es, Y. Fan, L. Janson, and J. Lv. Planning for gold: ’model-x’ knockoffs for high dimensional controlled variable selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B , 80:551–577, 2018. S. Choi. Conformal Bayes under label shift: Post-hoc calibration vs. in-training adaptation. In The 2nd Workshop on Epistemic Intelligence in Machine Learning , 2026. T. Ding, A. N. Angelopoulos, S. Bates, M. I. Jordan, and R. J. Tibshirani. Class-conditional conformal prediction with many classes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. R. G´ omez-Bombarelli, J. N. Wei, B. S´ anchez-Lengeling, D. Sheberla, D. Duvenaud, J. M. Hern´ andez-Lobato, J. Aguilera-Iparraguirre, T. D. Hirzel, R. P. Adams, and A. Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous representation of molecules. ACS Central Science , 4:268–276, 2018. Q. Hao, W. Liao, B. Jing, and H. Wei. Multi-condition conformal selection. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. Y. Jin and E. J. Cand` es. Selection by prediction with conformal p-values. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24:1–41, 2023. Y. Jin and E. J. Cand` es. Model-free selective inference under covariate shift via weighted conformal p-values. Biometrika , 113(1), 2026. 20 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

S. R. K¨ unzel, J. S. Sekhon, P. J. Bickel, and B. Yu. Metalearners for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects using machine learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA , 116(10): 4156–4165, 2019. J. Lei, M. G’Sell, A. Rinaldo, R. J. Tibshirani, and L. Wasserman. Distribution-free predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 113(523):1094–1111, 2018. J. Qin, Y. Liu, M. Li, and C.-Y. Huang. Revamping conformal selection with optimal power: ANeyman–Pearson perspective, 2025. Preprint arXiv:2502.16513 .C. J. Stone. Optimal global rates of convergence for nonparametric regression. The Annals of Statistics ,10(4):1040–1053, 1982. J. D. Storey. A direct approach to false discovery rates. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B ,64:479–498, 2002. M. Sugiyama, T. Suzuki, S. Nakajima, H. Kashima, P. von B¨ unau, and M. Kawanabe. Direct importance estimation for covariate shift adaptation. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics , 60:699–746, 2008. M. Sugiyama, T. Suzuki, and T. Kanamori. Density Ratio Estimation in Machine Learning . Cambridge University Press, 2012. A. B. Tsybakov. Introduction to Nonparametric Estimation . Springer, 2009. V. Vovk. Conditional validity of inductive conformal predictors. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Machine Learning (ACML) , 2012. V. Vovk, A. Gammerman, and G. Shafer. Algorithmic Learning in a Random World . Springer, 2005. S. Wager and S. Athey. Heterogeneous treatment effects using random forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 113(523):1228–1242, 2018. B. Zadrozny and C. Elkan. Obtaining calibrated probability estimates from decision trees and naive Bayesian classifiers. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,Williams Town, MA, 2001. 21 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

# A Additional Theoretical Results 

A.1 Rate Consequence for NCCS 

The main text gives a qualitative rate implication of the power-loss decomposition. The following result states the corresponding formal consequence when the learned membership score has a known L2(PX )estimation rate. 

Theorem 3 (Rate of NCCS) . Fix a distribution P for which Assumption 4 holds and the marginal probability of the null, or non-target, event is bounded away from zero. Suppose the learned score bg satisfies 

∥bg − g⋆∥L2(PX ) = Op(rnsc )

for the oracle ranking function 

g⋆(x) = hλ(x) = log 

 π0η(x)

λπ 1(1 − η(x)) 



.

Then the NCCS power loss satisfies 

Power(Φ η,q , P ) − Power(Φ NCCS  

> nsc ,n cal

, P ) ≤ CLrnsc + Op(n−1/2cal ).

In particular, if g⋆ is s-smooth in d dimensions and bg attains the classical nonparametric rate 

rnsc = Op



n−s/ (2 s+d)sc 



,

up to logarithmic factors (Stone, 1982; Tsybakov, 2009), and nsc ≍ ncal , then the power loss is Op(n−s/ (2 s+d)sc ),up to logarithmic factors. 

# B Proofs 

Throughout the proofs, Z = I{Y ∈ I} and C0 = {i ∈ D cal : Yi /∈ I} denotes the observed non-target calibration subset, with N0 = |C 0|. We write Ftr ,sc = σ(Dtr , Dsc ) for the information used before calibration. Conditional on Ftr ,sc , the learned score is fixed. 

B.1 Proof of Theorem 1 

Proof. Fix a null test candidate j, and condition on Ftr ,sc , on N0, and on the event YN +j /∈ I . Since the score g is fixed after conditioning on Ftr ,sc , Assumption 3 implies that 

{g(Xi) : i ∈ C 0} ∪ { g(XN +j )}

is an exchangeable collection of N0 + 1 null scores. First consider the randomized p-value. Randomly break all ties involving the test score, equivalently using the uniform variable Uj in the definition of ˜pj (g). Under exchangeability, the randomized upper-tail rank of the test score is uniformly distributed over the interval [0 , N 0 + 1] after this tie randomization. Therefore, conditional on N0 and Ftr ,sc ,

P{˜pj (g) ≤ t | YN +j /∈ I , N 0, Ftr ,sc } = t, t ∈ [0 , 1] .

Averaging over Ftr ,sc gives the exact statement conditional on N0.For the conservative p-value, let 

Bj = # {i ∈ C 0 : g(Xi) > g (XN +j )}, Ej = # {i ∈ C 0 : g(Xi) = g(XN +j )}.

22 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

Then 

pj (g) = 1 + Bj + Ej

N0 + 1 , ˜pj (g) = Bj + Uj (1 + Ej )

N0 + 1 .

Hence pj (g) ≥ ˜pj (g) almost surely. It follows that, for all t ∈ [0 , 1], 

P{pj (g) ≤ t | YN +j /∈ I} ≤ P{˜pj (g) ≤ t | YN +j /∈ I} ≤ t. 

This proves the conservative super-uniformity statement. 

B.2 Proof of Corollary 1 

Proof. Theorem 1 gives marginal super-uniformity for every null p-value. The Benjamini–Yekutieli theorem controls FDR at level q under arbitrary dependence when the null p-values are marginally super-uniform. This proves the arbitrary-dependence statement. For the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure, marginal super-uniformity alone is not sufficient under arbitrary dependence. Under the stated PRDS condition on the joint null p-values, the standard Benjamini–Hochberg theorem gives FDR ≤ q.

B.3 Proof of Proposition 1 

Proof. Fix a null selection level α0 ∈ [0 , 1]. By the Neyman–Pearson lemma, among all measurable selection regions A ⊆ X satisfying 

P{X ∈ A | Z = 0 } ≤ α0,

the region that maximizes P{X ∈ A | Z = 1 } is an upper level set of the likelihood ratio dP X|Z=1 /dP X|Z=0 ,with the usual randomized boundary convention if needed. By Bayes’ rule, 

dP X|Z=1 

dP X|Z=0 

(x) = η(x)1 − η(x)

π0

π1

,

whenever the Radon–Nikodym derivative is defined. The map u 7 → u/ (1 − u) is strictly increasing on (0 , 1), and the factor π0/π 1 does not depend on x. Therefore upper level sets of the likelihood ratio are the same as upper level sets of η, up to boundary ties. The same ranking is obtained from any strictly increasing transformation of η.

B.4 Proof of Proposition 2 

Proof. Under the location-scale model Y = μ(x) + σε with fixed σ > 0 and ε ⊥ X with continuous CDF 

Fε,

ηI (x) = P(Y ≥ c | X = x) = P



ε ≥ c−μ(x)

> σ



= 1 − Fε

 c−μ(x)

> σ



.

The map t 7 → 1 − Fε

  c−tσ

 is nondecreasing in t because Fε is nondecreasing and t 7 → (c − t)/σ is decreasing; it is strictly increasing on the support where Fε is strictly increasing. Hence ηI (x) = ϕ(μ(x)) for a strictly increasing ϕ. The conditional mean score smean (x) = μ(x) therefore satisfies ηI (x) = ϕ(smean (x)), so 

smean is selection-aligned. The signed residual score used by clipped cfBH is a monotone transform of 

μ(x) at the population level under the same model, and the likelihood-ratio score R(x; c) = P(Y ≤ c |

X = x)/P(Y > c | X = x) of Qin et al. (2025) equals (1 − ηI (x)) /η I (x), a strictly decreasing transform of 

ηI , so selecting its small values is aligned as well. Since the null-calibrated p-value in (4) depends on a score only through its induced order, all of these scores produce the same selected set as ηI .

B.5 Proof of Theorem 2 

Proof. Let g⋆ be a strictly increasing transformation of η, and suppose ∥bg − g⋆∥∞ → 0. For any score g,write ¯F gz (τ ) = P{g(X) ≥ τ | Z = z}, z ∈ { 0, 1}.

23 Null-Calibrated Conformal Selection via Target-Membership Scores 

The bounded-density part of Assumption 4 implies that small uniform perturbations of the score produce small uniform perturbations of the null and target upper-tail probabilities. Hence sup 

> τ

| ¯F bgz (τ ) − ¯F g⋆ 

> z

(τ )| → 0, z ∈ { 0, 1}.

The empirical null upper-tail distribution estimated from the null calibration subset converges uniformly to its population counterpart by the Glivenko–Cantelli theorem. Since the number of test candidates 

m is fixed, the null-calibrated p-values computed from bg converge uniformly over j = 1 , . . . , m to the corresponding population p-values computed from g⋆.Assumption 4 gives a unique stable population BH threshold for g⋆. Therefore the empirical BH operating threshold for bg converges to the population threshold for g⋆. The bounded-density condition also implies that a test score lies exactly on the limiting boundary with probability zero. Consequently, each selection indicator converges in probability to its oracle counterpart. Since m is fixed, bounded convergence yields Power( bg) → Power(Φ g⋆,q ).

Finally, g⋆ and η have identical rankings because g⋆ is a strictly increasing transformation of η. Hence Power(Φ g⋆,q ) = Power(Φ η,q ), which proves the claim. 

B.6 Proof of Corollary 2 

Proof. The local Lipschitz condition in Assumption 4 gives 

|P (bg) − P (g⋆)| ≤ CL∥bg − g⋆∥L2(PX )

for scores in a neighborhood of g⋆. This is the contribution of score estimation. The empirical procedure also estimates the null upper-tail score distribution from N0 observed non-target calibration examples. Conditional on N0, the Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz inequality gives a uniform Op(N −1/20 ) error for this empirical null distribution. The stable crossing condition in Assumption 4 translates this distributional error into an Op(N −1/20 ) perturbation of the BH operating threshold and of the resulting power. Combining the two terms gives Power(Φ g⋆,q , P ) − Power(Φ bg,q , P ) ≤ C∥bg − g⋆∥L2(PX ) + Op(N −1/20 ).

If g⋆ is a strictly increasing transformation of η, then Proposition 1 implies that g⋆ and η induce the same oracle ranking, so their population oracle powers are equal. 

B.7 Proof of Theorem 3 

Proof. The function 

g⋆(x) = hλ(x) = log 

 π0η(x)

λπ 1(1 − η(x)) 



is a strictly increasing transformation of η(x), so it induces the same oracle ranking as η. Hence Power(Φ g⋆,q , P ) = Power(Φ η,q , P ). Corollary 2 gives Power(Φ η,q , P ) − Power(Φ NCCS  

> nsc ,n cal

, P ) ≤ CL∥bg − g⋆∥L2(PX ) + Op(N −1/20 ).

The assumed score-estimation rate gives 

∥bg − g⋆∥L2(PX ) = Op(rnsc ).

If the marginal probability of the non-target event is bounded away from zero, then N0 ≍ ncal with high probability, and the calibration term is Op(n−1/2cal ). Combining these bounds proves the stated rate. The final Sobolev-rate statement follows by substituting the standard nonparametric estimation rate (Stone, 1982; Tsybakov, 2009). 24