Title: Measurement Induced Confounding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.28774v2

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 00:20:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Measurement Induced Confounding 

# George Perrett and Klint Kanopka 

New York University 

A critical assumption of observational studies is that all confounding variables must be known and su ffi ciently adjusted for to estimate causal e ff ects. An implicit, and often overlooked, aspect of this assumption is that all confounding variables have been measured without error. In the social and medical sciences, latent traits such as motivation, self-e ffi cacy, and ability measures are likely confounding variables. Because latent traits are not directly observable, conventional approaches to adjust for them in observational studies rely on collecting responses to individual items on a test or survey instrument and then adjust for sum scores, measurement model-derived ability estimates, or item responses directly. Through a process we describe as measurement induced confounding , we show that measurement error propagates through the estimation process and that current conventional approaches to adjusting for latent traits in observational studies produce biased estimates of the average treatment e ff ect with incorrectly calibrated coverage properties. A critical implication of this finding is that current observa-tional studies that attempt to adjust for latent confounding variables likely put forth biased causal estimates with incorrect uncertainty intervals. We show that measurement induced con-founding can be resolved through a Bayesian Joint Estimation approach that simultaneously estimates the measurement model, the treatment assignment model, and the response model. 

Keywords: Causal Inference, Observational Studies, Confounding, Latent Traits, Psychometrics, Item Response Theory 

Introduction 

When randomized studies are ethically or logistically in-feasible, researchers have no choice but to turn to observa-tional studies to answer causal questions. The primary limi-tation of observational studies is the assumption that all con-founding variables are known and appropriately conditioned on. Work on propensity score methods (Austin, 2011; De-hejia & Wahba, 2002; Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1984) and re-cent advances in machine learning for causal inference (Hahn et al., 2020; Hill, 2011; Hill et al., 2023) have focused on su ffi ciently conditioning on measured confounding variables without making unnecessary parametric modeling assump-tions. An overlooked subtlety of these approaches is that they not only assume all confounding variables are measured but that they have been measured without error . Methodological work in causal inference often begins from the position that there is zero measurement error in all confounding variables (Dorie et al., 2019). In practice, assuming all confounders are measured without error is problematic because confound-ing variables in the social, educational, and medical sciences 

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to George Perrett, Department of Applied Statistics, Social Science, and Humanities, New York University, 246 Greene St., Floor 3, New York, NY, 10003. E-mail: gp77@nyu.edu 

commonly include measures of latent traits, including—but not limited to—mathematical ability (Olitsky, 2014), well-being (Vandecandelaere et al., 2016), personality (Wagner et al., 2015), depression (Thibodeau et al., 2013), and mo-tivation (Kool et al., 2017). Methodological work in psy-chometrics specifically concerned with the measurement of these sorts of latent constructs explicitly assumes that latent traits are measured with error. To illustrate the problem posed by confounding variables that are latent traits, we will consider a hypothetical obser-vational study on the causal e ff ect of attending college on income. Knowing the causal e ff ect of college education on income is a pressing policy question with great societal im-plications, yet running a randomized study to answer it is impossible, leaving us no choice but to rely on observational methods. 1 For simplicity, suppose we knew that motivation was the only confounding variable and student motivation was linearly related to the probability that they attend college and also linearly related to their income. Here motivation meets the classical definition of a confounding variable and failing to su ffi ciently adjust for motivation would bias our es-timate of the causal e ff ect of college attendance on income. As such, in order to estimate the causal e ff ect of college attendance on income, we must su ffi ciently adjust for moti-vation. The problem we face is that motivation is a latent trait 

> 1

Randomizing students to either attend or not attend college is ethically non-permissible. 

> arXiv:2606.28774v2 [stat.ME] 1 Jul 2026

2 PERRETT AND KANOPKA 

that can not be directly observed. To measure motivation, we rely on instruments such as the achievement motivation scale (Cassidy & Lynn, 1989) or Motivational Trait Questionnaire (Heggestad & Kanfer, 2000). In our hypothetical observa-tional study, we will imagine we have collected responses to a 100-item instrument designed to measure motivation in this population. Given our 100 item responses per subject, there are multi-ple strategies for attempting to adjust for motivation. A rea-sonable first approach is computing a sum score by adding each individual’s 100-item responses together. This method is commonly used in the social sciences but it does not con-sider the possibility that some items may reveal more about an individual’s motivation than others. Item Response The-ory (IRT; Lord & Novick, 1968) provides a framework that allows discrete items with categorical responses to provide continuous estimates of latent motivation. Adjusting for an IRT estimate of motivation o ff ers greater flexibility than the sum-score approach, as it also allows items to contribute dif-ferential amounts of information. While more flexible IRT models and sum scoring di ff er in how they leverage informa-tion from item responses, they are similar in that they both invoke a model to collapse information from many items into a single score of the latent trait of interest. A recent branch of psychometrics work has advocated for directly using item information and avoid collapsing information into a single metric (Bruhn et al., 2025; Gilbert et al., 2025), and follow-ing these lines of research, rather than adjusting for a single summary of the item response string, we could also attempt to control for motivation by adjusting for the responses to all 100 items directly. In this work, we argue that adjusting for sum scores, IRT-derived scores, or even individual item responses themselves are all insu ffi cient to condition on confounding from latent traits. Through a process we describe as measurement in-duced confounding , measurement error propagates through the adjustment process, resulting in biased estimates and un-dercoverage of causal e ff ects. An uncomfortable implication of this work is that any observational study that uses conven-tional approaches to adjust for latent trait confounders may present both biased parameter estimates and has incorrect coverage properties. Fortunately, there is a path forward: We propose using Bayesian Joint Estimation of the measurement model, the response surface, and the assignment mechanism to address measurement-induced confounding. Before we can formalize the problem of measurement in-duced confounding and outline Bayesian Joint Estimation as a solution, we first begin by providing a brief overview of Item Response Theory and causal inference. 

Measurement and Item Response Theory 

A common challenge in behavioral research and the so-cial sciences is the measurement of latent traits , or qualities of an individual that are not themselves directly observable. Typically, the levels of these traits need to be inferred from something that is directly observable (e.g., responses to indi-vidual items on a test or survey, performances in structured tasks, etc.). We refer to any individual piece of observed information as an item and represent individual i’s response to item j as Xi j , denoting an individual realization of that response as xi j . In the case of dichotomous items that are scored as correct /incorrect (or endorsed /not endorsed), we have Xi j ∈ { 0, 1}, with Xi j = 1 when individual i responds correctly to item j. From this collection of responses, we aim to estimate individual i’s latent ability, θi, from the informa-tion contained in the J-length vector of their item responses, 

xi = {xi1, . . . , xiJ }. The model we use for this estimation is referred to as a measurement model .Let us first consider the sum score, ˆθsum i =

> J

X

> j=1

xi j ,

noting that it is itself a measurement model that carries strong assumptions, most obviously that each individual item con-tributes equally to the estimate of the latent trait. While this assumption may hold for carefully designed and tested in-struments, it is frequently implausible. Additionally, when comparing sum scores across individuals, if test forms are not identical across all examinees, they must be the same length and assumed to be exchangeable; that is to say, a person’s expected score should be independent of the specific form they were administered. An alternative measurement model commonly employed in educational testing is IRT. Instead of performing bulk ag-gregation of individual response vectors, IRT posits that indi-vidual item responses are observed with some error and that the probability of observing a correct response arises from an interaction between the latent trait of the individual and some quality of the item itself. While a litany of IRT models exist, we choose to focus here on the two parameter logistic 

model (2PL; for a broad survey of others, see Tutz, 2025). The 2PL gets its name from the fact that it models the proba-bility of correct response conditional on an individual’s latent ability using two parameters to represent item features that are mapped onto a probability using a logistic link function. That is, 

P(Xi j = 1 | θi) = 11 + e−a j(θi−b j) , (1) where b j is referred to as the item’s di ffi culty and a j is the item’s discrimination . A key feature of IRT is that items and respondents are placed onto the same scale, and the proba-bility of correct response is a function of the signed distance between and individual’s location on that scale, θi, and an item’s location on that scale, b j, weighted by the item’s dis-crimination a j. In the case where θi = b j, P(Xi j | θi) = 0.5, MEASUREMENT INDUCED CONFOUNDING 3linking interpretations between the placement of di ff erent ob-jects on a common scale. This means that when θi > b j,

P(Xi j | θi) > 0.5, so that individuals are more likely to answer items below their position on the scale correctly, and items above their position on the scale incorrectly. The discrimina-tion controls the slope of the response curve at its midpoint; this is the rate at which the probability of correct response scales with changes in latent ability. Discrimination can be thought of as the amount of certainty you have in an item’s ability to discriminate between high and low ability respon-dents. When a j = 0, P(Xi j = 1 | θi) = 0.5 for all values of θi.In this way, the item provides no information about individ-ual ability. Conversely, as a j → ∞ , when θi > b j the proba-bility of correct response P(Xi j = 1 | θi) → 1 (and the proba-bility of correct response approaches zero when θi < bi). When using a 2PL IRT model as specified above, there are three core assumptions that are made: monotonicity, unidi-mensionality, and local independence. Monotonicity refers to the fact that probability of correct response is strictly a monotonic function of latent ability. Unidimensionality refers to the fact that probability of correct response relies on (or nearly relies on) a single latent trait. Finally local independence refers to the assumption that individual item responses are considered to be independent, conditional on latent ability. 2 When these assumptions are met, IRT pro-duces trait estimates that are comparable even if individu-als respond to di ff erent items or di ff erent numbers of items, making it an attractive measurement model in the presence of missing data. Estimation is typically carried out by first estimating item parameters using marginal maximum likeli-hood estimation using an Expectation-Maximization proce-dure (Bock & Aitkin, 1981), with estimation of individual latent abilities done after. Moving forward, we use ˆ θsum to represent estimates of the latent trait from a sum score measurement model and ˆ θIRT to represent estimates of the latent trait from a 2PL IRT mea-surement model. 

Causal Inference Notation, Estimands, and Assumptions Notation and Causal Estimands 

Causal e ff ects are the di ff erence between potential out-comes (Holland, 1986). Let Z represent a binary treatment indicator. For a given individual i, Zi = 1 indicates that in-dividual i received the treatment, and Zi = 0 indicates that individual i did not receive the treatment. In the context of our college example, Zi = 1 denotes someone who attended college, and Zi = 0 denotes someone who did not attend college. Under a binary treatment, each individual has two potential outcomes: Yi(1) is what the outcome for individual 

i would have been under the treatment, and Yi(0) is what the outcome for individual i would have been without the treat-ment. In our context, Yi(1) represents what an individual’s earnings would have been if they had gone to college, and 

Yi(0) represents what that same individual’s earnings would have been if they did not attend college. An individual’s causal e ff ect is the di ff erence between that individual’s potential outcomes. We can formalize the indi-vidual causal e ff ect as τ. For a given individual i, their causal eff ect is τi = Yi(1) − Yi(0). The fundamental problem of causal inference is that for each individual, we only observe a single potential outcome: Yi = Yi(1) · Zi + Yi(0) · (1 − Zi). In the context of our applied example, we cannot simultane-ously observe what an individual’s earnings would have been had they gone to college and what that individual’s earnings would have been had they not gone to college, because a per-son either attends or does not attend. An unfortunate consequence of the fundamental problem of causal inference is that the individual causal e ff ects, τi, are non-identifiable. While we can not estimate the individual 

causal e ff ects, we can—when necessary structural assump-tions are satisfied—estimate average causal e ff ects by us-ing observed data to model potential outcomes (G. W. Im-bens & Rubin, 2015). Importantly, there are several dis-tinct average treatment e ff ects. In this work, we focus on the conditional average treatment e ff ect (CATE) defined as CATE ≡ E[Yi(1) − Yi(0)]. We highlight the CATE as our av-erage treatment e ff ect of interest because it is the causal esti-mand most familiar to applied researchers. 3 Next, we outline the necessary structural assumptions for unbiased estimates of the CATE in observational studies. 

Assumptions 

In observational studies, the treatment and control groups di ff er in their distributions of covariates. We can account for these di ff erences by modeling either the potential outcomes or the assignment mechanism as a function of the observed data (Hill et al., 2023; Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; Rubin, 1991). However, this modeling process is only a viable solu-tion when we have measured all confounding variables. In the statistics literature, this unconfoundedness assumption is formalized as the strong ignorability assumption where 

Y(1) , Y(0) ⊥ Z | X, where X represents all confounding vari-ables (Holland & Rubin, 1987). In the present example, we adjust the ignorability notation to Y(1) , Y(0) ⊥ Z | θ where 

θ is our latent trait of motivation. An often overlooked as-pect of ignorability is that it not only assumes all confound-ing variables have been measured, but that they have been measured without error . This subtlety is central to what we describe as the problem of measurement induced confound-ing. Here, we assume that motivation is the sole confounding 

> 2Note that violations of these assumptions are not dealbreakers and can be accounted for with alternative model specifications; for examples, see (Van Der Linden & Hambleton, 1997)
> 3For a review of di ff erent average treatment e ff ects, refer to Gel-man et al. (2021) or Hernán and Robins (2010)

4 PERRETT AND KANOPKA 

variable. Where we depart from convention, however, is the rejection of the overly optimistic assumption that motivation is measured without error. When the parametric form of the treatment assignment mechanism and the response surface is unknown, the ability to su ffi ciently adjust for confounding variables also requires the existence of an empirical counterfactual, meaning that, for every area of the covariate space containing a treated in-dividual, there must be a non-zero probability of containing a non-treated individual (and vice versa). This assumption is known as overlap, common support, or positivity, defined as 0 < P(Z = z | X) < 1, where X represents all confound-ing variables. Within our context, we denote the overlap as-sumption as 0 < P(Z = z | θ) < 1, implying that, for all levels of motivation, there must be at least one individual who attended college and at least one who did not. 4 In all of our forthcoming simulation studies, overlap is known to be satisfied. Moreover, in the context of this work, we also assume a linear parametric relationship for both the treatment mechanism and the response surface, making the overlap as-sumption unnecessary. Finally, an implicit assumption of the definition of poten-tial outcomes is that any individual’s response to treatment only depends on the treatment assignment of that individual. In practice, this means we must assume that one individual’s treatment does not impact another individual’s outcome. As such, we must assume that one student attending college does not influence the income of a separate student in our study. Formally, this assumption is described as the stable unit treat-ment value assumption and abbreviated as SUTVA (Rubin, 1978). 5 Again, in our subsequent simulations, SUTVA is satisfied. When the assumptions of strong ignorability, overlap, and SUTVA are satisfied, E[Y(0) | Z = 1, X] = E[Y(0) |Z = 0, X]and E[Y(1) | Z = 1, X] = E[Y(1) | Z = 0, X]. Substituting our single confounder motivation for X gives E[Y(0) | Z =

1, θ ] = E[Y(0) | Z = 0, θ ] and E[Y(1) | Z = 1, θ ] = E[Y(1) |

Z = 0, θ ]. Under these conditions, estimating the CATE in an observational study becomes a modeling task where the analyst must su ffi ciently condition on θ in order to estimate the CATE without bias. As we demonstrate in the following section, the problem of measurement induced confounding occurs when researchers attempt to substitute estimates or proxy measures for θ without accounting for measurement error. 

Measurement Induced Confounding 

With the motivation as the sole confounding variable, the strong ignorability assumption is that Y(1) , Y(0) ⊥ Z | θ.The problem of measurement induced confounding is that 

Y(1) , Y(0) ̸ ⊥ Z | ˆθsum where ˆ θsum are estimated latent trait values from a sum score measurement model, Y(1) , Y(0) ̸ ⊥

Z | ˆθIRT where ˆ θIRT are estimated latent trait values from a ZXYˆθIRT 

ˆθsum 

θ

Figure 1 

The DAG representing confounding from the latent trait θ

(motivation). Individuals item responses X are a function of the latent trait θ. Sum scores ( ˆθsum ) and IRT estimates ( ˆθIRT )are both functions of item responses X. 

2PL IRT measurement model, and Y(1) , Y(0) ̸ ⊥ Z | X j where 

X are the item responses themselves. Measurement induced confounding occurs when estimates of latent traits, or proxy measures of latent traits (such as directly adjusting for item responses) are used as substitutes for directly adjusting for the latent trait. The core problem becomes clear when visual-ized through the language of Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG; Pearl, 1995, 2009). The DAG shown in Figure 1 encodes the dependencies between the variables in our hypothetical observational study. Motivation ( θ) is the only confounding variable, responses to the 100-item motivation inventory ( X)are a function of an individuals underlying motivation, and estimates of motivation through either sum scoring (ˆ θsum ) or a 2PL IRT model (ˆ θIRT ) are functions of the observed item responses ( X). Given the DAG shown above in Figure 1, θ (motivation) must be adjusted for to account for the confounding on the eff ect of college attendance ( Z) on income ( Y). Adjusting for items directly( X), sum scores (ˆ θsum ), or estimates from an IRT model (ˆ θIRT ) does not close the backdoor path through θ,leaving residual confounding. Following the framework in-troduced by Textor et al. (2016), we can conclude that, given Figure 1, item responses ( X), sum scores (ˆ θsum ), or IRT es-timates (ˆ θIRT ) are not su ffi cient adjustment sets. The impli-cation is that adjusting for estimates of latent traits or item responses that are functions of latent traits will not elimi-nate confounding from latent traits ( θ). Measurement in-duced confounding thus occurs when a researcher mistak-enly attempts to use measurements of latent traits to directly account for confounding from latent traits, leaving depen-dence between the treatment Z and potential outcomes Y(1)  

> 4For an in depth exploration of the overlap assumption in obser-vational studies see Hill and Su (2013)
> 5This assumption applies to both observational and randomized studies MEASUREMENT INDUCED CONFOUNDING

5and Y(0). Due to measurement induced confounding, the only way we can estimate the causal e ff ect of interest is by directly adjusting for the latent trait θ. However, because latent traits are fundamentally not directly observable, we appear to have reached an impasse. As we show in the following section, a Bayesian Joint Estimation approach allows us to directly adjust for the eff ect of θ without directly observing values of 

θ itself. 

Bayesian Joint Estimation 

Figure 2 presents a simplified version the DAG encod-ing the relationship between our single confounding variable motivation ( θ), item responses from our 100-item motivation inventory ( X), treatment variable attending college ( Z), and outcome variable income ( Y). ZXY

θ

Figure 2 

This simplified DAG removes ˆθsum and ˆθIRT because they are not necessary in the Bayesian Joint Estimation approach. Using Bayesian Joint Estimation, we can adjust for the con-founding from θ without directly observing θ. Our approach is directly derived from, and necessarily implied by, this DAG. 

From this DAG, we write down the full joint distribution, 6

p(θ, Z, Y, X) = p(θ)p(X|θ)p(Z|θ)p(Y|θ, Z). (2) Assuming conditional independence across units and local independence across items, we further decompose the joint into 

p(θ)p(X|θ)p(Z|θ)p(Y|θ, Z)

= p(θ)

Y

> i j

p(Xi j |θi)

Y

> i

p(Zi|θi)

Y

> i

p(Yi|θi, Zi) (3) where i indexes individuals and j indexes items. To estimate probabilities from the data, p(Xi j |θi), p(Zi|θi), and p(Yi|θi, Zi) are assigned parametric likelihoods and p(θ)is assigned a prior distribution: 

p(Xi j |θi) ≡ Xi j |a j, b j, θ i ∼ Bern  logit −1  a j(θi − b j) (4) 

p(Zi|θi) ≡ Zi|β0, β θ, θ i ∼ Bern  logit −1 β0 + βθθi

 (5) 

p(Yi|θi, Zi) ≡ Yi|γ0, γ θ, γ z, θ i, Zi, σ ∼ N γ0 + γθθi + γzZi, σ 2

(6) 

p(θ) ∼ N (0 , 1) . (7) Closer examination reveals that p(Xi j |θi) is parameterized as a 2PL IRT model, p(Zi|θi) is parameterized as a logis-tic propensity score model where the assignment mechanism is determined by θ, and p(Yi|θi, Zi) is parameterized as re-sponse surface modeling that adjusts for our single confound-ing variable, θ.Substituting the parametric likelihoods from Equations 4– 7 gives: 

p(θ)×

Y

> i j

Bern  logit −1(a j(θi − b j)) ×

Y

> i

Bern  logit −1 β0 + βθθi

 ×

Y

> i

Nγ0 + γθθi + γzZi, σ 2

(8) Recall that our inferential goal is to obtain unbiased esti-mates of the CATE with correctly calibrated measures of uncertainty. Under this parameterization, γz is our esti-mate of the CATE. All other parameters are nuisance pa-rameters and, for notational convenance, are collapsed into 

Θ = na, b, θ, β 0, β θ, γ 0, γ θ, σ o. Next, we apply Bayes Theorem to obtain the full joint posterior probability of γz

conditional on observed variables Y, Z, and X:

p(γz, Θ | y, z, X) ∝ p(γz)p(Θ)×

Y

> i j

Bern  logit −1(a j(θi − b j)) ×

Y

> i

Bern  logit −1 β0 + βθθi

 ×

Y

> i

Nγ0 + γθθi + γzZi, σ 2

(9) We couple this posterior with weakly informative prior dis-        

> 6For areview of factorization and its application within Bayesian Networks refer to work from Koller and colleagues (2009).

6 PERRETT AND KANOPKA 

tributions: 

p(a) ∼ Exp(1) (10) 

p(b) ∼ N (0 , 10 2) (11) 

p(θ) ∼ N (0 , 1) (12) 

p(σ) ∼ Exp(1) (13) 

p(β0), p(βθ), p(γ0), p(γz), p(γθ) ∼ N (0 , 52). (14) To sample from the joint posterior p(γz, Θ | y, z, X), we use the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo with the No U-Turn Sampler (NUTS) implemented in the Stan programming language (Carpenter et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2020). The Bayesian joint posterior distribution in Equation 9 was derived from, and is necessarily implied by, the Bayesian network shown in Fig-ure 2 and was explicitly formulated to estimate the causal eff ect of a treatment variable in the presence of confounding variables that are latent traits. The key insight is that the DGP implied by Figure 1 and Figure 2 has unmodeled covariance between X and Z due to their common cause, θ. Merely adjusting for summaries of X, regardless of their functional form , without modeling the assignment mechanism p(Zi | θi)explicitly leads to biased estimates of the CATE, γZ , and thus, undercoverage. Our approach of explictly modeling the treatment as-signment mechanism is not novel and mirrors the Mixed Eff ects Structural Equations Model described by Schofield (2015) and the Conditional Independence model of Richard-son and Gilks (1993) developed for general modeling con-texts. We do provide two key contributions beyond these works, however: First, we explicitly consider the prob-lem of measurement-induced confounding within potential-outcomes based causal inference. Second, we demonstrate the problem (and subsequent solution) through a unique derivation grounded in DAG-based causal models. In the following section, we present a simulation study with the aim of providing evidence that measurement in-duced confounding leads to biased estimates and undercover-age when latent traits are adjusted for with sum scores (ˆ θsum ), estimates from a 2PL IRT model(ˆ θIRT ), or direct adjustments for item responses ( X) and our approach provides unbiased estimates and properly calibrated coverage of the CATE. 

Simulation Study 

Our simulation study is designed around our motivating example of an observational study with the aim of estimat-ing the causal e ff ect of college attendance on income. We assume that the researcher knows that motivation is the only confounding variable and that motivation is related to college attendance (the treatment) and income (the outcome) through a simple linear function. To measure motivation, we rely on binary responses from a J = 100 item motivation inventory. Presented results are based on M = 1000 replications. 7

Data Generating Process 

Equations 15–25 show the complete data generating pro-cess used to generate item responses (15–18), treatment as-signments (19–20), and potential outcomes (21–25). Consis-tent with our earlier notation, we use i to represent unique individuals. In all simulations, we work with a sample size of N = 1000 individuals ( i ∈ 1, 2, 3, . . . , 1000). We use j to represent unique items from the 100 item motivation inven-tory ( j ∈ 1, 2, 3, . . . , 100). Individual motivation is denoted as θi and drawn from a standard normal distribution. Re-sponses to the motivation inventory ( Xi j ) are drawn from a 2PL IRT model with di ffi culty parameter values ( b j) drawn from a standard normal distribution and discrimination pa-rameters ( a j) drawn from a normal distribution with a mean of 1 and standard deviation of .2. The propensity score, also known as the assignment mechanism, ( πi) is the probability that an individual will receive the treatment (attend college). 

θi ∼ N (0 , 12) (15) 

b j ∼ N (0 , 12) (16) 

a j ∼ N (1 , . 22) (17) 

Xi j ∼ Bern  logit −1 a j(θi − b j) (18) 

πi = Φ (θi) (19) 

Zi ∼ Bern( πi) (20) 

ϵ1 ∼ N (0 , 12) (21) 

ϵ0 ∼ N (0 , 12) (22) 

Yi(1) = θi + .2 + ϵ1 (23) 

Yi(0) = θi + ϵ0 (24) 

Yi = Yi(1) · Zi + Yi(0) · (1 − Zi) (25) An important aspect of the data generating process is that both the assignment mechanism and response surface fol-low a linear parametric functional form. Recent work in causal inference has focused on flexibly modeling potential outcomes or the assignment mechanism without relying on parametric modeling assumptions (Dorie et al., 2019; Hill, 2011; Hill et al., 2023). In the current context, where the un-derlying confounding follows a simple linear function, flex-ible estimators o ff er no additional benefits and simple linear models should be su ffi cient to adjust for confounding. Next, we specifically define the nature of these linear models. 

Estimators 

Our simulation study compares the Bayesian Joint Esti-mation approach, described and outlined in section 5, against             

> 7Full simulation and replication code is available at the accompanying GitHub repository: https: // github.com /gperrett /
> Measurement-Induced-Confounding MEASUREMENT INDUCED CONFOUNDING

7current methods commonly used in social science to adjust for latent traits. While Bayesian Joint Estimation adjusts di-rectly for e ff ects of the unobserved latent trait θ, conventional approaches can only adjust for estimates (or proxy measures) of the underlying latent trait. In our simulation study, we con-sider adjusting for sum scores ˆ θsum i , adjusting for an estimate of the latent trait from a 2PL IRT model (ˆ θIRT i ), and directly adjusting for individual item responses themselves ( xi). Equations 26–28 present three estimators that model po-tential outcomes as functions of the treatment variable and an estimate or proxy for motivation. While each estimator di ff ers in how it measures motivation, they are similar in that they attempt to adjust for confounding by modeling the re-sponse surface variable. Moving forward, we refer to this approach as response surface modeling. 

yi = β0 + β1zi + β2 ˆθsum i + ϵi (26) 

yi = β0 + β1zi + β2 ˆθIRT i + ϵi (27) 

yi = β0 + β1zi +

X

> j

β j xi j + ϵi (28) An alternative to response surface modeling is modeling the assignment mechanism, the process where individuals self-select into treatment status. Estimating casual e ff ects by modeling the assignment mechanism involves estimating the probability that a given individual receives the treatment, known as the propensity score and commonly denoted as π.Estimates of this propensity score (ˆ π) are used to re-weight the data so that data resembles the properties of a random-ized experiment. In this work we use inverse probability treatment weighting (IPTW) to re-weight our observational data. If the data is su ffi ciently re-weighted so that it resem-bles the balance of randomized studies, a simple di ff erence in means between the treatment and control group will produce an unbiased estimate of the CATE. The IPTW estimator we use for re-weighting and estimation of the CATE is shown in Equation 29. 1

n

X

> i

YiZi

ˆπi

− Yi(1 − Zi)1 − ˆπi

(29) The ability for IPTW to produce unbiased estimates of the CATE fully relies on the researchers ability to model the propensity score to su ffi ciently achieve balance across all confounding variables (Kang & Schafer, 2007; Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; Smith & Todd, 2005). As with response surface modeling, researchers using conventional approaches must rely on estimates or proxy measures to model the role of latent traits, such as motivation, in the assignment mech-anism. Three approaches for modeling the propensity score are shown in Equations 30–32. The first uses estimates of motivation from sum scores (ˆ θsum i ), the second estimates mo-tivation with a 2PL IRT model (ˆ θIRT i ), and the third directly adjusts for all item responses ( xi). ˆπi = 11 + exp  − (β0 + β1 ˆθsum i ) (30) ˆπi = 11 + exp  − (β0 + β1 ˆθIRT i ) (31) ˆπi = 11 + exp  − (β0 + P j β j xi j ) (32) A know limitation of IPTW estimators is that they produce biased estimates of standard errors for the CATE (Austin, 2016; Lunceford & Davidian, 2004). In our simulations, we correct for this bias by estimating standard errors with a sand-wich variance estimator (Williamson et al., 2014). Specifi-cally, we use the sandwich estimator in the survey R pack-age (Lumley & Lumley, 2020) as described in Gelman, Hill, and Vehtari (2021). 

Results 

Standardized bias from response surface modeling and IPTW is presented in Figure 3. Across conventional ap-proaches, attempting to adjust for the latent confounding variable (motivation) with sum scores (ˆ θsum ), IRT-derived es-timates (ˆ θIRT ), or item responses directly ( xi) all led to biased estimates of the CATE. With response surface modeling, at-tempting to adjust for confounding with sum scores led to an average bias of .0498 standard deviations, using estimates from a 2PL IRT model did not lead to improvement and re-sulted in an average bias of .0584 standard deviations, and di-rectly adjusting for observed item responses produced an av-erage bias of 0.0475 standard deviations. Standardized bias was even larger under IPTW models, estimating the propen-sity score from sum scores lead to an average standardized bias of .126, estimating the propensity score with estimates from 2PL IRT model led to an average standardized bias of .102, and estimating the propensity score with observed item responses led to an average standardized bias of .103. Figure 4 presents results from our proposed Bayesian Joint estimation approach outlined above. Conventional es-timation approaches that attempt to directly adjust for mea-surements of the latent confounder led to biased estimates of the Average Treatment E ff ect, but when the latent trait, assignment mechanism, and response surface are modeled jointly we obtained unbiased estimates of the Average Treat-ment E ff ect. Well calibrated uncertainty intervals are equally, if not more important, than estimates that are unbiased. Cover-age of 95% uncertainty intervals for our Bayesian Joint es-timation and conventional approaches are presented in Fig-ure 5. The Bayesian Joint estimator is perfectly calibrated, with 95% intervals covering the true average treatment e ff ect 8 PERRETT AND KANOPKA sum score IRT X           

> response surface  IPTW
> −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4
> 050 100 150 200
> 050 100 150 200
> standardized bias
> count

Figure 3 

Standardized bias for conventional approaches that adjust for estimates from measurement models (sum scores of IRT estimates) or directly adjust for item responses. Top pan-els display response surface estimators while bottom panels display IPTW estimators. Unbiased estimators converge to 0 (the blue line). Red lines represent average standardized bias for each estimator. Discrepancies between the red and blue lines signal that an estimator is biased. Traditional ap-proaches that attempt to adjust on estimates of latent traits with sum scores or IRT estimates or directly adjusting for item responses all produces biased estimates of the CATE. 

95% of the time. In contrast, all other approaches system-atically undercovered. Critically, the coverage properties of our Bayesian Joint estimation approach did not come at the expense of greater uncertainty. The length of the 95% uncer-tainty intervals was comparable or shorter than alternative approaches signaling that the desirable coverage properties are from better estimation rather than from inflating uncer-tainty. 

Evidence from a Constructed Observational Study 

A criticism of simulation studies is that they are unrepre-sentative of actual data analysis in applied settings (Hernán, 2019). To supplement our simulation-based results, we turn to a constructed observational study developed by Keller et al. (2025). Here, participants were enrolled in a random-ized study on the causal e ff ect of a mathematics training ses-sion on a subsequent math test (a vocabulary training ses-sion served as the control arm). Prior to assignment, partic-ipants were asked if they would prefer to enroll in a mathe-matics training session or a vocabulary training session. To construct the parallel observational study, Keller and col-leagues dropped participants whose randomized treatment assignment did not align with their preferences. After this alteration, participants in the observational dataset have self selected into their preferred treatment arms. Results from the randomized study thus provide an unbiased experimen-Bayesian Joint Posterior    

> −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
> 025 50 75
> standardized bias
> count

Figure 4 

Standardized bias from the Bayesian Joint Estimation ap-proach. Under this approach estimates converge to 0 stan-dardized bias and the red and blue lines overlap. Unlike con-ventional approaches, Bayesian Joint Estimation can recover unbiased estimates of the CATE in the presence of confound-ing from a latent trait. Bayesian Joint Estimation     

> response surface: X
> response surface: sum score IPTW: IRT
> response surface: IRT
> IPTW: X
> IPTW: sum score
> 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95
> 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
> Interval Length
> Coverage

Figure 5 

Coverage rates (y-axis) and average 95% uncertainty inter-val length (x-axis) for all estimation methods. The Bayesian Joint Estimation approach achieves nominal coverage while conventional approaches all undercover. The average in-terval length for the Bayesian Joint Estimation approach is equal to or less than all other approaches demonstrating that nominal coverage does not come at the expense of e ffi ciency. 

tal benchmark for the true CATE, while the constructed ob-servational data provide a testing ground for observational methods where the goal is to recover the e ff ect from the ran-domized study when using the observational data. In the constructed observational study, we consider gen-der, race, marital status, age, income, educational attain-ment, parents’ educational attainment, exposure to a cal-culus course, whether a participant endorses “I like Math,” and baseline mathematical ability as confounding variables. Baseline mathematical ability is treated as a latent variable MEASUREMENT INDUCED CONFOUNDING 9measured by a 12 item pretest exam. While most observa-tional studies fail to report pre-intervention measures of po-tentially confounding latent variables at anything finer than an aggregate level, this analysis is enabled by Keller et al. (2025) providing all individual item-level responses. Figure 6 presents results from our analysis. We compare estimates of the CATE from the Bayesian Joint Estimation approach against the IPTW and response surface approaches considered in the previous section. These results demon-strate a real applied research setting in which adjusting for a latent confounding variable (baseline mathematics ability) using sum scores, IRT-derived scores, or individual item re-sponses is used to control for confounding. response surface: IRT response surface: sum score IPTW: X response surface: X IPTW: IRT IPTW: sum score Bayesian Joint Estimation    

> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> Estimated CATE

Figure 6 

All estimation methods (y-axis) and the estimated CATE (x-axis) for the constructed observational study. The dashed line represents the unbiased benchmark from the randomized study. Estimation methods are ordered by bias (relative to the experimental benchmark). The Bayesian Joint Estimation approach recovers the result of the randomized study. All other approaches are more biased and approaches that rely on modeling the response surface all have 95% uncertainty intervals that fail to cover the experimental benchmark. 

The experimental benchmark yields a CATE of .7603. Our Bayesian Joint Estimation approach finds a CATE of .73, al-most identical to the experimental benchmark. In contrast, conventional response surface modeling approaches yielded estimates of 1.24 when mathematical ability is adjusted for using sum scores, 1.24 when mathematical ability is adjusted for using IRT scores, and 1.19 when raw item responses are used to adjust for mathematical ability. When using IPTW, estimates were .99 when adjusting with sum scores, 1.06 when adjusting with IRT scores, and 1.19 when adjusting with raw item responses. To better understand the magnitude of these di ff erences, we reframe these results in terms of standard deviations of the outcome variable. Here, conventional approaches ranged from a low of .06 standard deviations away from the experi-mental benchmark (IPTW: sum score) to a high of .132 stan-dard deviations away from the experimental benchmark (re-sponse surface: IRT). In sharp contrast, the estimate from Bayesian Joint Estimation is only .007 standard deviations away from the experimental benchmark. Notably, these re-sults are nearly identical the standardized bias produced by conventional approaches in our simulation study (see Figures 3 and 4). The 95% uncertainty intervals from all response surface models failed to cover the experimental benchmark. While all 95% uncertainty intervals from IPTW estimators covered the experimental benchmark, this finding was driven by the high degree of uncertainty (wider intervals). In practice, re-searchers aim for estimates that are both unbiased and ef-ficient (low uncertainty). Here, IPTW estimates are both far away from the benchmark (indicative of bias) and in-effi cient (wide intervals). Bayesian Joint Estimation is the only method presented here that produces an e ffi cient esti-mate that is nearly identical to the experimental benchmark. 

Discussion 

Fields such as education and psychology often seek to do causal inference that requires adjusting for latent confound-ing variables. The most pressing implication of our findings is that observational studies that adjust for latent traits (re-gardless of whether they are using IRT estimates, sum scores, or item responses) when estimating average treatment e ff ects likely yield biased estimates with incorrectly calibrated un-certainty intervals. Our results show that by simultaneously estimating a measurement model for latent traits, the treat-ment assignment model, and the response surface, we can obtain unbiased estimates of the CATE in the presence of a latent confounding variable. Importantly, our joint estima-tion approach does not come at the expense of estimation effi ciency. In practice, researchers often adjust for numerous con-founding variables rather than a single confounder. While our hypothetical example considered the case of a single la-tent confounding variable (motivation), the Bayesian Joint Estimation approach can trivially scale to adjust for multiple latent confounding variables by adding an additional mea-surement model for each latent confounding variable. Given 

K latent confounders, the joint model is fit with K measure-ment models, but is always fit with one treatment assignment model and one response model. An example of a setting with multiple latent confounding variables is provided in the sup-plemental GitHub repository. 8 Similarly, the Bayesian Joint Estimation approach proposed in this work also readily ac-commodates adjustment for variables that are not latent. Our analysis of the constructed observational study requires also controlling for numerous directly observable confounders.  

> 8See: https: // github.com /gperrett /
> Measurement-Induced-Confounding

10 PERRETT AND KANOPKA 

For this adjustment, observed confounding variables should be included in the treatment assignment and response mod-els. Because these variables are directly observed, a separate measurement model is not necessary. A substantial limitation of the proposed Bayesian Joint Estimation is the reliance on strong parametric assumptions. Even when all confounding variables are adjusted for, fail-ing to account for existing nonlinearities and interaction ef-fects among them leads to biased estimates of average treat-ment e ff ects and poorly calibrated coverage (Hill, 2011; Hill et al., 2023). In settings without latent confounding vari-ables, nonlinearities and interactions are easily accounted for by estimating both the treatment assignment and response surface with flexible machine learning models that minimize parametric modeling assumptions (Dorie et al., 2019). Crit-ically, existing flexible estimation methods do not yet solve the problem of measurement induced confounding. As with the parametric cases presented in this paper, under the cur-rently available flexible estimators (e.g., Bayesian Additive Regression Trees (Chipman et al., 2010; Hill, 2011), Causal Forests (Athey & Wager, 2019), and SuperLearner (Polley et al., 2011)), the only latent variable specifications available to researchers are to either adjust for estimates of latent traits or item responses directly. As we have shown in the linear parametric setting, these approaches are insu ffi cient to adjust for the confounding from latent traits. We know that flexible models alone will not solve the problem of measurement in-duced confounding, because their key advantage is that they do not require knowledge of the correct parametric model apriori and do nothing to address the backdoor path through the assignment mechanism. In this work, all conventional estimation approaches fail even under the correct parametric specification. This result implies that existing nonparamet-ric methods for causal inference cannot address confounding from latent variables. The ability of researchers to adjust for latent confounders without making strong parametric assumptions is critical for unbiased estimates of average treatment e ff ects in observa-tional studies where confounding by latent traits is present. In our analysis of the constructed observational study by Keller et al. (2025), we were able to recover the experi-mental benchmark while making strong linear parametric as-sumptions, however, evidence from the pioneering LaLonde constructed observational study shows that relying on strong parametric assumptions can lead to biased estimates in obser-vational settings (Dehejia & Wahba, 2002; G. Imbens & Xu, 2024; LaLonde, 1986). Extending the Bayesian Joint Esti-mation approach demonstrated in this work to nonparametric models introduces substantial complexity, but is an important area of future research. In the linear setting demonstrated in this work, joint estimation of the measurement model, treat-ment assignment model, and response surface requires com-puting partial derivatives of the log posterior with respect to the parameters (Betancourt, 2017). Bayesian Additive Re-gression Trees (BART; Chipman et al., 2010) are a natural choice for a Bayesian nonparametric estimator for causal in-ference problems, because BART simultaneously provides flexible estimation and uncertainty quantification. The pri-mary challenge of extending Bayesian joint estimation to a BART-type model is that BART estimates are obtained as a sum of step functions, which are inherently non-continuous and non-di ff erentiable. This problem is not BART specific. Other popular nonparametric estimators for causal inference, such as causal forests (Athey & Wager, 2019), are also based on non-di ff erentiable step functions. One potential path forward is to expand upon the stan4bart implementation (Dorie et al., 2022), which combines the Stan and BART models within a single Gibbs sampler; however, the current implementation of stan4bart cannot accommodate an IRT-derived measurement model specification. 9

A separate parametric concern in the present work is our reliance on a 2PL IRT model to estimate latent traits. We se-lected a 2PL model because it is a flexible IRT specification that performs well even when the underlying data generating process for item responses is not a 2PL model (Domingue et al., 2024). In cases of unipolar, asymmetric, or other bespoke response models, users could supply a di ff erent measurement model or look to a non-parametric alternative (Feuerstahler et al., 2026; Huang et al., 2025; Sijtsma, 1998). Given that many observational studies adjust for sum scores on various latent traits, an uncomfortable implication of the results of this work is these studies likely report bi-ased estimates of average treatment e ff ects with incorrectly calibrated uncertainty intervals. Fortunately, the problem of measurement induced confounding is inherently limited to observational studies. We have presented a solution to the problem of measurement induced confounding when linear parametric models are su ffi cient approximations of the data generating process, however, an alternative, and more opti-mal, solution is to run randomized studies. Under random treatment assignment, the distribution of all pre-treatment variables, including latent variables, are identical in expecta-tion between the treatment and control group (Gelman et al., 2021). An implication of this property is that under random as-signment, the ignorability assumption is Y(1) , Y(0) ⊥ Z,rather than the stronger form of Y(1) , Y(0) ⊥ X necessary in observational studies. When randomization is pristine, there is no loss to follow up, and SUTVA is satisfied, there are no confounding variables because all pre-treatment variables are independent from treatment assignment and unbiased es-timates of average treatment e ff ects can be obtained without additional statistical adjustment. Randomized studies resolve the problem of measurement induced confounding because    

> 9Note that while Stan can, at the time of this writing, easily ac-commodate bespoke IRT models, stan4bart cannot. MEASUREMENT INDUCED CONFOUNDING

11 randomization eliminates all confounding variables by de-sign 10 .While randomization address the problem of measure-ment induced confounding by design, running randomized studies is not always possible. We choose our hypothetical example, the influence of college attendance on income, be-cause it is a clear example of a setting where randomization is impermissible. Even when randomization is ethically de-fensible, randomized studies still poss logistical constraints and in some contexts observational studies are the only lo-gistically feasible option. For researcher who must rely on observational studies, this work cautions against relying on traditional measurement models to adjust for confounding from latent traits. 

References 

Athey, S., & Wager, S. (2019). Estimating treatment e ff ects with causal forests: An application. Observational studies , 5(2), 37–51. Austin, P. C. (2011). An introduction to propensity score methods for reducing the e ff ects of confounding in observational studies. Multivariate behavioral re-search , 46 (3), 399–424. Austin, P. C. (2016). Variance estimation when using inverse probability of treatment weighting (iptw) with sur-vival analysis. Statistics in medicine , 35 (30), 5642– 5655. Betancourt, M. (2017). A conceptual introduction to hamilto-nian monte carlo. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.02434 .Bock, R. D., & Aitkin, M. (1981). Marginal maximum likeli-hood estimation of item parameters: Application of an em algorithm. Psychometrika , 46 (4), 443–459. Bruhn, J., Gilraine, M., Ludwig, J., & Mullainathan, S. (2025). Do test scores misrepresent test results? an item-by-item analysis (tech. rep.). National Bureau of Economic Research. Carpenter, B., Gelman, A., Ho ff man, M. D., Lee, D., Goodrich, B., Betancourt, M., Brubaker, M., Guo, J., Li, P., & Riddell, A. (2017). Stan: A probabilistic programming language. Journal of statistical soft-ware , 76 , 1–32. Cassidy, T., & Lynn, R. (1989). A multifactorial approach to achievement motivation: The development of a comprehensive measure. Journal of Occupational Psychology , 62 (4), 301–312. Chipman, H. A., George, E. I., & McCulloch, R. E. (2010). Bart: Bayesian additive regression trees. Dehejia, R. H., & Wahba, S. (2002). Propensity score-matching methods for nonexperimental causal stud-ies. Review of Economics and statistics , 84 (1), 151– 161. Domingue, B. W., Kanopka, K., Kapoor, R., Pohl, S., Chalmers, R. P., Rahal, C., & Rhemtulla, M. (2024). The intermodel vigorish as a lens for understanding (and quantifying) the value of item response mod-els for dichotomously coded items. psychometrika ,

89 (3), 1034–1054. Dorie, V., Hill, J., Shalit, U., Scott, M., & Cervone, D. (2019). Automated versus do-it-yourself methods for causal inference: Lessons learned from a data analysis competition. Dorie, V., Perrett, G., Hill, J., & Goodrich, B. (2022). Stan and bart for causal inference: Estimating heteroge-neous treatment e ff ects using the power of stan and the flexibility of machine learning. Entropy , 24 (12), 1782. Feuerstahler, L. M., Verkuilen, J., Setti, F., & Johnson, P. (2026). Defining asymmetry in item response the-ory. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology .Gelman, A., Hill, J., & Vehtari, A. (2021). Regression and other stories . Cambridge University Press. Gilbert, J. B., Himmelsbach, Z., Soland, J., Joshi, M., & Domingue, B. W. (2025). Estimating heterogeneous treatment e ff ects with item-level outcome data: In-sights from item response theory. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management , 44 (4), 1417–1449. Guo, J., Gabry, J., Goodrich, B., & Weber, S. (2020). Package ‘rstan’. URL https: // cranr-projectorg /web /packages /rstan2020 .Hahn, P. R., Murray, J. S., & Carvalho, C. M. (2020). Bayesian regression tree models for causal infer-ence: Regularization, confounding, and heteroge-neous e ff ects (with discussion). Bayesian Analysis ,

15 (3), 965–1056. Heggestad, E. D., & Kanfer, R. (2000). Individual di ff erences in trait motivation: Development of the motivational trait questionnaire. International Journal of Educa-tional Research , 33 (7-8), 751–776. Hernán, M. A. (2019). Comment: Spherical cows in a vac-uum: Data analysis competitions for causal infer-ence. Hernán, M. A., & Robins, J. M. (2010). Causal inference. Hill, J. (2011). Bayesian nonparametric modeling for causal inference. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 20 (1), 217–240. Hill, J., Perrett, G., & Dorie, V. (2023). Machine learn-ing for causal inference. In Handbook of match-ing and weighting adjustments for causal inference 

(pp. 415–444). Chapman; Hall /CRC. Hill, J., & Su, Y.-S. (2013). Assessing lack of common sup-port in causal inference using bayesian nonparamet-    

> 10 This is assuming the structural assumptions that Y(1) ,Y(0) ⊥Z
> and SUTVA are satisfied

12 PERRETT AND KANOPKA 

rics: Implications for evaluating the e ff ect of breast-feeding on children’s cognitive outcomes. The An-nals of Applied Statistics , 1386–1420. Holland, P. W. (1986). Statistics and causal inference. Jour-nal of the American statistical Association , 81 (396), 945–960. Holland, P. W., & Rubin, D. B. (1987). Causal inference in retrospective studies. ETS Research Report Series ,

1987 (1), 203–231. Huang, Q., Bolt, D. M., & Liao, X. (2025). Theory-driven irt modeling of vocabulary development: Matthew eff ects and the case for unipolar irt. Journal of Edu-cational Measurement , 62 (2), 199–224. Imbens, G., & Xu, Y. (2024). Lalonde (1986) after nearly four decades: Lessons learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00827 , 14 .Imbens, G. W., & Rubin, D. B. (2015). Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical sciences . Cam-bridge university press. Kang, J. D., & Schafer, J. L. (2007). Demystifying double robustness: A comparison of alternative strategies for estimating a population mean from incomplete data. Keller, B., Wong, V. C., Park, S., Zhang, J., Sheehan, P., & Steiner, P. M. (2025). A new four-arm within-study comparison: Design, implementation, and data. Ob-servational Studies , 11 (2), 153–188. Koller, D., & Friedman, N. (2009). Probabilistic graphical models: Principles and techniques . MIT press. Kool, A., Mainhard, T., Jaarsma, D., van Beukelen, P., & Brekelmans, M. (2017). Eff ects of honours programme participation in higher education: A propensity score matching approach. Higher Edu-cation Research & Development , 36 (6), 1222–1236. LaLonde, R. J. (1986). Evaluating the econometric evalua-tions of training programs with experimental data. 

The American economic review , 604–620. Lord, F. M., & Novick, M. R. (1968). Statistical theories of mental test scores . IAP. Lumley, T., & Lumley, M. T. (2020). Package ‘survey’. 

Available at the following link: https: // cran r-project org .Lunceford, J. K., & Davidian, M. (2004). Stratification and weighting via the propensity score in estimation of causal treatment e ff ects: A comparative study. 

Statistics in medicine , 23 (19), 2937–2960. Olitsky, N. H. (2014). How do academic achievement and gender a ff ect the earnings of stem majors? a propen-sity score matching approach. Research in Higher Education , 55 (3), 245–271. Pearl, J. (1995). From bayesian networks to causal net-works. In Mathematical models for handling partial knowledge in artificial intelligence (pp. 157–182). Springer. Pearl, J. (2009). Causal inference in statistics: An overview. Polley, E. C., Rose, S., & Van der Laan, M. J. (2011). Super learning. In Targeted learning: Causal inference for observational and experimental data (pp. 43–66). Springer. Richardson, S., & Gilks, W. R. (1993). Conditional inde-pendence models for epidemiological studies with covariate measurement error. Statistics in Medicine ,

12 (18), 1703–1722. Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. B. (1983). The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal e ff ects. Biometrika , 70 (1), 41–55. Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. B. (1984). Reducing bias in observational studies using subclassification on the propensity score. Journal of the American statisti-cal Association , 79 (387), 516–524. Rubin, D. B. (1978). Bayesian inference for causal e ff ects: The role of randomization. The Annals of statistics ,34–58. Rubin, D. B. (1991). Practical implications of modes of sta-tistical inference for causal e ff ects and the criti-cal role of the assignment mechanism. Biometrics ,1213–1234. Schofield, L. S. (2015). Correcting for measurement error in latent variables used as predictors. The annals of ap-plied statistics , 9(4), 2133. Sijtsma, K. (1998). Methodology review: Nonparametric irt approaches to the analysis of dichotomous item scores. Applied Psychological Measurement , 22 (1), 3–31. Smith, J. A., & Todd, P. E. (2005). Does matching overcome lalonde’s critique of nonexperimental estimators? 

Journal of econometrics , 125 (1-2), 305–353. Textor, J., Van der Zander, B., Gilthorpe, M. S., Li´ skiewicz, M., & Ellison, G. T. (2016). Robust causal infer-ence using directed acyclic graphs: The r pack-age ‘dagitty’. International journal of epidemiol-ogy , 45 (6), 1887–1894. Thibodeau, M. A., Welch, P. G., Sareen, J., & Asmund-son, G. J. (2013). Anxiety disorders are inde-pendently associated with suicide ideation and at-tempts: Propensity score matching in two epidemi-ological samples. Depression and anxiety , 30 (10), 947–954. Tutz, G. (2025). A short guide to item response theory mod-els . Springer. Van Der Linden, W. J., & Hambleton, R. K. (1997). Hand-book of modern item response theory . Springer. Vandecandelaere, M., Schmitt, E., Vanlaar, G., De Fraine, B., & Van Damme, J. (2016). E ff ects of kinder-garten retention for at-risk children’s psychoso-MEASUREMENT INDUCED CONFOUNDING 13 cial development. Educational Psychology , 36 (8), 1354–1389. Wagner, J., Becker, M., Lüdtke, O., & Trautwein, U. (2015). The first partnership experience and personality de-velopment: A propensity score matching study in young adulthood. Social Psychological and Person-ality Science , 6(4), 455–463. Williamson, E. J., Forbes, A., & White, I. R. (2014). Variance reduction in randomised trials by inverse probabil-ity weighting using the propensity score. Statistics in medicine , 33 (5), 721–737.