Title: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.31190v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Jul 2026 00:36:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 73

Markdown Content:
# Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Jiachun Li 

Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, MIT, jiach334@mit.edu 

David Simchi-Levi 

Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, MIT, dslevi@mit.edu 

Abstract. Modern experiments, including evaluations of AI-enabled services and platform interventions, often depart from independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sampling because assignments may be adaptive, balanced across covariates, or subject to rollout constraints such as exposure, fairness, and budget limits. This paper studies the efficiency benchmark for estimating causal targets in such sequential experi-ments. We show that every non-anticipating design induces an average propensity score, and we establish a semiparametric lower bound: for regular locally unbiased estimators, attainable precision is bounded by the i.i.d. efficiency benchmark evaluated at this induced score. The average propensity score thereby serves as a common benchmark and design target, allowing sequential experimental design to be viewed as choosing or learning an efficient allocation rule, with operational constraints entering through the admissible set when present. We then develop implementable batched adaptive designs that approach this benchmark through two complementary mechanisms. The first uses regression adjustment based on efficient influence functions; for general smooth estimands it attains the benchmark under standard nuisance-rate conditions, while for linear functionals of outcome means it achieves a sharp second-order rate. The second uses adaptive covariate balancing to attain the same benchmark through the assignment mechanism, enabling simple moment-based estimation. Both routes require only a small number of policy updates, making them compatible with delayed feedback and easier to monitor in operational deployments. Numerical experiments and an empirical study of AI medical-assistant evaluation demonstrate the practical efficiency gains, including in multi-treatment settings. Overall, the paper provides a unified framework for characterizing and designing efficient sequential experiments. 

1. Introduction 

In the era of large-scale AI deployment, platforms and service providers continuously introduce new AI-enabled services, agentic workflows, and intervention policies. Many of these systems remain difficult to evaluate through mechanistic reasoning alone: their real-world effects depend not only on complex model behavior but also on hard-to-predict human responses, including phenomena such as algorithm aversion (Dietvorst et al. 2015) and performance changes under sustained AI exposure (Budzyn et al. 2025). As a result, randomized experiments have become an essential paradigm for causal evaluation. For example, recent large-scale efforts to assess the reliability of LLM-based medical assistants for the general public rely on randomized preregistered studies to establish safety and efficacy prior to broader deployment (Bean et al. 2026). More broadly, experimentation allows treatment effects to be identified with minimal modeling assumptions even when the underlying system is opaque (Gilotte et al. 2018). 

1

> arXiv:2606.31190v1 [stat.ME] 30 Jun 2026

2 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity  

> Figure 1 An illustration of the need to evaluate AI medical assistants prior to deployment.

In practice, however, such experiments rarely conform to classical independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sampling. Modern deployments often use adaptive assignment to improve statis-tical precision, covariate balancing to stabilize comparisons across heterogeneous populations, and rollout restrictions such as exposure limits, treatment budgets, or subgroup fairness requirements. These features create dependence across observations and make classical i.i.d.-based efficiency the-ory insufficient as a guide for experimental design. Consequently, experimental design emerges as a primary statistical and operational decision. Experimental traffic, eligible users, and evaluation time are limited resources, and different treat-ment variants may provide different amounts of information about the target estimand. At the same time, highly reactive per-unit adaptation can be operationally costly, difficult to monitor, and statistically sensitive to noisy short-run outcomes. In platform experimentation and high-stakes settings such as clinical evaluation, outcome feedback may also arrive with delay, making continu-ous policy updates impractical. These considerations motivate batched adaptation : the assignment policy is updated only a small number of times, allowing experimenters to maintain a rollout that is easier to implement and audit, more stable under noisy outcomes, and naturally compatible with delayed feedback. Batched designs are also analytically useful because observations remain conditionally i.i.d. within each batch. These considerations lead to the central inquiry of this paper: what is the efficiency benchmark for estimating a target causal estimand in a sequential experiment, and how can an implementable design approach it in practice? 

Our response is organized around the induced average propensity score . We show that every non-anticipating design induces such an object, and we establish a semiparametric lower bound Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 3 

> Figure 2 A roadmap of the main results.

showing that regular locally unbiased estimators are subject to the i.i.d. efficiency benchmark evaluated at this induced average propensity. The average propensity score therefore serves as a common benchmark and design target for sequential experiments. Operational restrictions such as exposure, budget, or fairness constraints can be encoded through the admissible set of average propensities when present, while the central theory focuses on identifying and approaching the corresponding benchmark. We then establish that, in standard and practice-relevant settings, this benchmark can be approached constructively by batched adaptive designs through two comple-mentary routes: regression adjustment and covariate balancing. Together, these results provide a unified and practically relevant framework for efficient multi-treatment experimentation beyond classical i.i.d. randomization. We summarize our contributions as follows. 

1. Characterizing the efficiency benchmark via average propensity. For a broad class of non-anticipating experimental designs, we establish that the induced average propensity score is the central object governing first-order efficiency. Specifically, we prove a semiparametric lower bound showing that regular locally unbiased estimators are subject to the efficiency benchmark of an i.i.d. experiment evaluated at the induced average propensity. This characterization places several previously separate settings including adaptive, finely stratified, and local-randomization designs under the same framework by showing that their statistical limits are governed by the same induced-propensity principle. It also recasts experimental design as the problem of choosing, or in adaptive settings learning, an efficient average propensity, with application-specific constraints incorporated through the admissible design class when present. For smooth estimands whose efficient influence functions are well defined, the corresponding optimality condition takes the form of a generalized Neyman allocation, recovering the classical Neyman allocation for the ATE as a special case. The framework also extends naturally from scalar targets to low-dimensional vector parameters: under 4 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

L2 risk, the optimal design is characterized by the conditional second-moment matrices of the efficient influence function, yielding a multivariate analogue of Neyman allocation. 

2. Approaching the benchmark via batched adaptive designs. Having characterized the benchmark, we show that it can be approached constructively in standard, practice-relevant settings using batched adaptive designs. Our procedures divide the experiment into a logarithmic number of batches and update the assignment policy only at batch boundaries. This batched structure has operational advantages: it requires few policy updates, is easier to implement and audit, is more stable under noisy outcomes, and accommodates delayed feedback, while simultaneously restoring a conditional i.i.d. structure within each batch. Building upon this shared principle, we develop two complementary routes to the same benchmark, each with different practical tradeoffs: 

• 2.1 Regression adjustment. Our first route uses batched adaptive regression adjustment based on the efficient influence function (EIF). At a high level, the design assigns treatments according to an estimated optimal propensity within each batch and updates this target propensity only at batch boundaries using accumulated historical data. For general smooth estimands, we prove that under the classical nuisance-estimation rate of n−1/4, this procedure approaches the oracle semiparametric benchmark. For the important special case of linear functionals of the outcome mean—including average treatment effects and policy evaluation— we obtain a sharper refinement: the n−1/4 bottleneck vanishes, we explicitly characterize the second-order rate at which the efficiency benchmark is approached, and we establish a match-ing lower bound proving that this rate is minimax-sharp up to logarithmic factors. 

• 2.2 Covariate balancing. Our second route approaches the same benchmark by design ,through batched adaptive covariate balancing. This route is motivated by settings in which flexible nuisance estimation is difficult or undesirable, and it uses a simple, moment-based estimator in the final evaluation step. Compared with the existing covariate-balancing liter-ature, our setting is more general: covariates arrive sequentially, treatment must be assigned immediately, the optimal target propensity is unknown and must be learned online across batches, and the resulting efficiency guarantees cover a broad class of moment-defined esti-mands, with the average treatment effect as a special case. By connecting balancing mecha-nisms to online discrepancy control, we construct a batched sequential design that drives the balancing remainder to zero within each batch while simultaneously learning the optimal aver-age propensity across batches. As a result, the optimal semiparametric benchmark is attained through assignment-side control, bypassing the n−1/4 nuisance-rate bottleneck that appears in the general regression-adjustment route. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 reviews the related literature. Section 3 introduces the induced average propensity score and establishes the main benchmark result of Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 5

the paper: for regular locally unbiased estimators under any non-anticipating experiment, possibly with dependent assignments, the achievable precision is bounded by the semiparametric efficiency benchmark of an i.i.d. experiment evaluated at the corresponding average propensity score. Sec-tions 4 and 5 then develop two complementary constructive routes to approach this benchmark using batched adaptive designs. Section 4 studies the estimator-side route based on batched adap-tive regression adjustment, and shows that under suitable conditions this procedure learns the target propensity and approaches the oracle benchmark. Within this route, Section 4.4 focuses on the important special case of linear functionals of the outcome mean, including weighted ATEs and policy value, and provides an explicit characterization of the rate at which the efficiency benchmark is approached, together with a matching lower bound. Section 5 studies the design-side route based on batched adaptive covariate balancing, showing that the same semiparametric benchmark can be attained by design using a simple moment-based estimator. Finally, Section 6 reports simulation results and empirical evidence based on AI medical-assistant evaluation. 

1.1 Literature Review 

Our paper is related to three strands of literature: semiparametric efficiency beyond i.i.d. exper-iments, adaptive experimentation for efficient estimation, and covariate balancing as a route to efficiency by design. Across these strands, our central theme is that the induced average propensity score provides a common benchmark and design object for sequential experiments. 

Semiparametric efficiency beyond i.i.d. experiments. Semiparametric efficiency under inde-pendent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sampling is classical in statistics and econometrics (Newey 1994, Van der Vaart 2000). Beyond i.i.d. experiments, however, existing results are largely organized around specific non-i.i.d. design classes. For example, Armstrong (2022) derives efficiency bounds for a broad class of unconstrained adaptive sequential experiments; Bai et al. (2023) and Rafi (2023) study finely stratified and covariate-adaptive designs under fixed propensity rules; and Cytrynbaum (2021) analyzes optimal allocation in two-stage sampling-and-assignment designs. While these papers are closely related in spirit, they operate under different assumptions on the assignment mechanism and do not subsume one another. Our paper provides a unified lower-bound perspective encompassing these previously separate settings. By identifying the induced average propensity score as the central benchmark object, we develop a common efficiency characterization for non-anticipating designs, and in particular resolve the conjectured efficiency characterization in the two-stage design of Cytrynbaum (2021). 

Adaptive experimentation for efficient estimation. The literature on response-adaptive ran-domization studies how treatment allocation ratios can be learned and updated during the exper-iment (Hu and Rosenberger 2006). More recent work has focused on adaptive experimentation for 6 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

efficient causal estimation, often with the goal of approaching Neyman-type allocations that mini-mize the asymptotic variance of the average treatment effect (ATE) (Kato et al. 2020, Zhao 2023, Dai et al. 2023, Li et al. 2024, Cook et al. 2024). Most of this literature, however, is centered on the ATE, binary treatments, or parameter-specific allocation rules. Our paper extends this line of work in three directions. First, we move from the ATE to general smooth estimands and show that the optimal design admits a generalized Neyman-allocation interpretation, with treatment allocation driven by arm-specific efficient-influence-function variance contributions. Second, we allow for mul-tiple treatments rather than only two arms. Third, for linear functionals of the outcome mean, we provide a cross-fitted batched procedure together with an explicit second-order characterization of the rate at which the semiparametric benchmark is approached. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first minimax characterization of the rate of convergence to the semiparametric efficiency bound for a general class of experiments. 

Covariate balancing and by-design efficiency. Covariate balancing—including rerandomiza-tion, matched-pair designs, and finely stratified designs—provides an alternative route to improving efficiency, especially in small samples (Li et al. 2018, Bai 2022, Cytrynbaum 2024). The central idea in this literature is that semiparametric efficiency can sometimes be attained “by design,” allowing simple estimators to perform well without heavy regression adjustment (Bai et al. 2023). However, this literature is largely offline: it typically assumes that all covariates are observed before assignment, focuses primarily on the ATE, and treats the target propensity score as fixed or externally specified. In contrast, our covariate-balancing route is constructive, adaptive, and substantially more general. The design operates in an online batched setting in which covariates arrive sequentially and treatment must be assigned immediately. Rather than assuming that the optimal propensity is known in advance, our procedure jointly learns the target propensity and implements the balancing design within the experiment. Moreover, the resulting efficiency guar-antees apply to a broad class of moment-defined estimands with multiple treatments, rather than only the binary-treatment ATE. 

2. Problem Formulation 

We study a class of causal experiments in which treatment assignment is constrained by a natural 

non-anticipation requirement. We index units by an abstract assignment order or information order , rather than exclusively by an online arrival time. This broader viewpoint provides a single operational framework that unifies independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) randomization, offline covariate-based balancing designs (such as stratified or matched-pair experiments), and sequential adaptive designs. This section establishes the basic setup and defines the ingredients needed for the benchmark analysis. Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 7

2.1 Data-generating process 

Fix an integer K ≥ 2 and let the treatment space be 

A = {1, . . . , K }.

Let the covariate space be X = [0 , 1] d for some fixed dimension d ≥ 1. This normalization is imposed without loss of generality up to measurable rescaling, and is convenient for the nonparametric arguments used later in the paper. For each unit t = 1 , . . . , n , let 

Wt :=  Xt, Y t(1) , . . . , Y t(K)

denote the latent covariates and potential outcomes, where Xt ∈ X and Yt(a) ∈ Y for each a ∈ A .We assume throughout that the latent units are independent and identically distributed: 

W1, . . . , W n

> i.i.d.

∼ P0.

Write PX for the marginal law of Xt, and for each a ∈ A let pa(y | x) denote the conditional law of Yt(a) given Xt = x. Under treatment assignment At ∈ A , the observed outcome is Yt := Yt(At).

Thus, the observed data for unit i are given by 

Ot = ( Xt, A t, Y t), t = 1 , . . . , n. 

Crucially, while the latent units Wt are i.i.d., the observed sequence {Ot}nt=1 need not be i.i.d., because the treatment assignment mechanism may depend on previously revealed information. 

2.2 Information order and non-anticipating designs 

The experiment proceeds according to an assignment order t = 1 , . . . , n . This order specifies the sequence in which treatment decisions are made, but need not coincide with online arrival in calendar time. The information available to the experimenter is described by a filtration 

{F t}nt=0 .

Here Ft−1 denotes the information available immediately before treatment is assigned to unit t.The initial σ-algebra F0 may be nontrivial; for instance, in offline designs, it may already contain the entire baseline covariate profile ( X1, . . . , X n). 

Definition 1 (Non-anticipating design). An experimental design ALG is non-anticipating 

if for every t = 1 , . . . , n there exists a measurable kernel et(· | x, f ) ∈ ∆( A) such that 

P(At = a | Xt, Ft−1) = et(a | Xt, Ft−1), a ∈ A .

Equivalently, At is generated by a rule measurable with respect to σ(Xt, Ft−1). 8 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

The intuition behind this definition is straightforward: an assignment decision can depend on any information already revealed, but it cannot depend on unrevealed outcomes or covariates. Future covariates are admissible only if they are already measurable with respect to the current information set, as in offline designs where all covariates are known upfront. We impose two standard regularity conditions throughout: (i) Outcome visibility. Conditional on ( Xt, A t), the law of Yt does not depend on Ft−1.(ii) Positivity. There exists ε > 0 such that et(a | x, f ) ≥ ε for all a ∈ A , all t, and for PX -a.e. x

and P ALG -a.e. f .We write G for a feasible design class , representing any collection of non-anticipating designs satisfying operational restrictions of interest (e.g., exposure limits, treatment-share constraints, or balancing rules). The lower bound developed in Section 3 applies broadly to any such design class. The constructive procedures developed later in the paper, however, will focus on approaching this benchmark within standard, practice-relevant subclasses. 

2.3 Examples of non-anticipating designs 

The non-anticipating formulation is designed to be inclusive. We provide four examples, each serving a distinct conceptual role. In each case we make explicit what the information order {F t}

is, since this determines which designs are admissible. 

Example 1: i.i.d. randomization. There is no pre-experimental information and the filtration is the natural data filtration: 

F0 = {∅ , Ω}, Ft = σ(X1, A 1, Y 1, . . . , X t, A t, Y t), t = 1 , . . . , n. 

The assignment rule does not actually use any of the accumulated history beyond the current covariate Xt:

et(a | x, Ft−1) = e(a | x), t = 1 , . . . , n, 

for a fixed propensity e(a | x). This is the classical i.i.d. experiment: each ( Xt, A t, Y t) is marginally distributed as in the product model with propensity e.

Example 2: complete randomization with fixed treatment shares. The experiment enforces exact treatment counts na with PKa=1 na = n, assigning sequentially without replacement and without using covariates. The relevant information for the assignment rule is the vector of past treatment counts, so one may take 

F0 = {∅ , Ω}, Ft = σ(A1, . . . , A t), t = 1 , . . . , n, 

or equivalently the full history filtration (which contains the same treatment-count information). The assignment rule depends on the history only through Nt−1,a := Pt−1 

> s=1

1{As = a}:

et(a | x, Ft−1) = na − Nt−1,a 

n − t + 1 .Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 9

This design yields dependent assignments across units—knowing past assignments changes the remaining allocation budget—but remains strictly non-anticipating because Nt−1,a is Ft−1-measurable. 

Example 3: offline stratified or matched-pair randomization. The distinctive feature of offline designs is that the entire covariate profile is observed before any treatment is assigned. Formally, 

F0 = σ(X1, . . . , X n), Ft = σ X1, . . . , X n, A π(1) , Y π(1) , . . . , A π(t), Y π(t)

, t = 1 , . . . , n, 

where π = π(X1, . . . , X n) is any measurable ordering of the units determined from the full covariate profile. Since all covariates are already observed at time 0, fixing such an order is without loss of generality: it simply provides a sequential representation of the offline design. Let {Bℓ}Lℓ=1 be a partition of X , and let 

Nℓ := 

> n

X

> i=1

1{Xi ∈ Bℓ}

be the realized size of stratum ℓ. Suppose that within each stratum ℓ, exactly mℓa units are assigned to arm a, with PKa=1 mℓa = Nℓ. For the unit π(t) with Xπ(t) ∈ Bℓ, let 

Nℓa,t −1 := 

> t−1

X

> s=1

1{Xπ(s) ∈ Bℓ, A π(s) = a}, Rℓ,t −1 := 

> t−1

X

> s=1

1{Xπ(s) ∈ Bℓ}.

Then the sequential assignment rule is 

et(a | Xπ(t), Ft−1) = mℓa − Nℓa,t −1

Nℓ − Rℓ,t −1

, when Xπ(t) ∈ Bℓ.

Thus, conditional on the full covariate profile, the design is simply without-replacement random-ization within each stratum. The induced average propensity for any unit with x ∈ Bℓ is therefore ¯ea(x) = mℓa 

Nℓ

, x ∈ Bℓ.

Matched-pair randomization is the special case in which each stratum has size two and one unit is assigned to each arm. 

Example 4: batched adaptive design. The assignment order is divided into consecutive batches 

I1, . . . , I B of sizes γb := |Ib|. The information order is the natural full-history filtration 

F0 = {∅ , Ω}, Ft = σ(X1, A 1, Y 1, . . . , X t, A t, Y t),

together with the coarser pre-batch filtration Hb := Fmin Ib−1 (with H1 = F0), which contains all data collected before batch b starts. The defining restriction of a batched design is that the within-batch propensity function e(b)(a | x) is Hb-measurable and does not update within the batch. For any t ∈ Ib,

et(a | x, Ft−1) = e(b)(a | x).10 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Thus, within a batch, observations are conditionally i.i.d. given Hb; across batches, the propensity is updated based on accumulated history. The induced average propensity is ¯ea(x) = 1

n

> B

X

> b=1

γb EALG e(b)(a | x) .

This batched structure is the primary operational form studied in the later constructive sections. 

2.4 Average propensity as the sufficient statistics of the design 

The central design object for the lower-bound analysis is the induced average propensity score . It measures the average assignment mass allocated to each treatment at each covariate value over the course of the experiment. 

Definition 2 (Average propensity). For any non-anticipating design ALG , define ¯ea(x) := 1

n

> n

X

> t=1

EALG [et(a | x, Ft−1)] , a ∈ A . (1) Different designs may generate complex and highly diverse dependence structures. However, the lower bound in the next section will show that the relevant summary of the design for the statistical benchmark is captured by ¯ e, which can be understood as the “sufficient statistics” of a design. 

2.5 Target parameter and the efficiency benchmark under an i.i.d. assignment rule 

Before addressing dependent designs, we first ask a simpler benchmark question: if the assignment rule were fixed, what would the semiparametric efficiency benchmark be? Let O = ( X, A, Y ) denote an observation from an i.i.d. model with density 

p(o) = pX (x) e(a | x) pa(y | x), a ∈ A ,

where the propensity e(· | x) is treated as a known, fixed rule, while pX and {pa(· | x)}a∈A are unrestricted. Let θ : M(e) → R be a pathwise differentiable target parameter, and let φe ∈ L02(P0)denote the efficient influence function (EIF) under propensity e, which is the canonical score object whose variance determines the semiparametric efficiency benchmark in the i.i.d. design model. The following lemma gives a standard structural representation of the EIF under known assignment. 

Lemma 1 (EIF structure under known assignment) . Let θ : M(e) → R be pathwise differ-entiable at P0. Then there exist measurable functions g : X → R and va : X × Y → R for a ∈ A such that 

φe(O) =  g(X) − θ(P0) + X

> a∈A

1{A = a}

e(a | X) va(X, Y ), (2) 

where 

E[va(X, Y ) | X, A = a] = 0 , a ∈ A .Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 11 

For a fixed propensity e, define the corresponding semiparametric efficiency benchmark by 

V (e) := Eφe(O)2 . (3) If the data were genuinely i.i.d. under the fixed rule e, the semiparametric efficiency bound for estimating θ(P0) would be V (e)/n . For example, in the binary-treatment ATE case with propensity 

e(x) = P(A = 1 | X = x) and outcome regressions μa(x) = E[Y | X = x, A = a], the EIF is 

φATE (O) = μ1(X) − μ0(X) − θ + Ae(X)

 Y − μ1(X) − 1 − A

1 − e(X)

 Y − μ0(X).

Accordingly, the semiparametric efficiency bound is E[φATE (O)2]/n , which is the smallest asymp-totic variance achievable by regular estimators under the fixed assignment rule. The key benchmark question is whether, and how, this fixed-assignment bound continues to govern adaptive or balanced designs with non-i.i.d. observed data. 

3. The Statistical Limit of General Experiment Designs 

This section addresses the benchmark question raised in the introduction: within a feasible class of non-anticipating experiments, what is the best achievable statistical accuracy for estimating a target causal estimand? Our main result demonstrates that this benchmark is given by the fixed-assignment semiparametric efficiency bound evaluated at the induced average propensity score. In this sense, the statistical limit of a complex experiment is governed by a much simpler object: the average treatment exposure that the design allocates to each arm across covariate values. 

3.1 A scalar benchmark via average propensity 

We begin with a scalar target parameter θ(P0). The key result of this subsection establishes that, although a non-anticipating design may induce substantial dependence across observations through adaptivity, balancing, or operational constraints, its semiparametric efficiency benchmark remains characterized by the fixed-assignment benchmark, evaluated at the induced average propensity score ¯ e. Intuitively, no matter how complicated the assignment rule is over the course of the experiment, the precision with which outcomes under a given treatment can ultimately be estimated depends on how much sample exposure the design allocates to that treatment across covariate values. The induced average propensity score ¯ e summarizes exactly this average exposure. The theorem shows that, for the purpose of the semiparametric efficiency benchmark, this is the object that matters. The formal proof is more subtle and is deferred to the appendix. 

Theorem 1 (Efficiency benchmark via average propensity) . Let ALG be any non-anticipating design, and let ¯e be its induced average propensity. Let T = T (Fn) be an estimator of θ(P0). Suppose that T is locally unbiased along the least-favorable submodel associated with 12 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

the fixed-assignment model under propensity ¯e; that is, along this one-dimensional submodel 

{Pτ : |τ | < δ },

EALG  

> P0

[T ] = θ(P0), ddτ EALG  

> Pτ

[T ] τ =0 

= ddτ θ(Pτ ) τ =0 

.

Then 

Var ALG  

> P0

(T ) ≥ 1

n V (¯ e) = 1

n Eφ¯e(O)2 . (4) 

Remark 1 (Asymptotically unbiased estimators). The finite-sample statement above is the exact form used in the proof. The same argument yields the usual first-order version for regular estimators. For a sequence of non-anticipating designs ALG n with induced average propensities ¯ en,suppose that Tn = Tn(Fn) has local bias o(n−1/2) along the least-favorable submodel associated with the fixed-assignment model under ¯ en. Then 

Var ALG n 

> P0

(Tn) ≥ 1

n V (¯ en) + o(n−1).

Consequently, if V (¯ en) → V (¯ e), then lim inf  

> n→∞

n Var ALG n 

> P0

(Tn) ≥ V (¯ e).

Theorem 1 shows that, for locally unbiased estimation, the finite-sample efficiency benchmark of a non-anticipating experiment is governed by a single design object: its induced average propensity score. Remark 1 gives the corresponding first-order formulation for regular estimators whose local bias is negligible at the n−1/2 scale. Thus, the same benchmark applies both to the exact unbiased formulation used in the proof and to the asymptotic regime commonly used in semiparametric efficiency theory. The implication is that adaptivity, balancing, batching, and other operational features affect first-order efficiency through the average assignment mass they deliver to each treat-ment arm across covariate values. Once the induced average propensity ¯ e is fixed, the corresponding i.i.d. semiparametric benchmark V (¯ e)/n gives the relevant lower bound. In this sense, the average propensity score is a sufficient design summary for the efficiency benchmark and the natural object to optimize or learn in the constructive procedures developed below. As a practical illustration, consider a platform evaluating a new AI-assisted feature under rollout constraints. The platform may utilize a highly adaptive rule to decide which users receive the feature, perhaps to respect traffic limits or fairness requirements. Theorem 1 shows that, for the purpose of the benchmark, the full complexity of that adaptive rule is encapsulated by the average treatment exposure it induces across user types. Thus, the relevant benchmark question is not how to optimize an arbitrary path-dependent assignment mechanism directly, but which average propensity scores are achievable and how favorable they are for the target estimand. Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 13 

3.2 Vector targets and generalized Neyman allocation 

Many modern experiments are inherently multi-treatment and therefore involve vector-valued tar-gets. This is particularly relevant in applications where the goal is not a single scalar contrast, but the simultaneous evaluation of several treatment effects. For instance, a platform may com-pare multiple AI-assisted workflows against a common baseline, seeking to estimate the vector of treatment effects for all variants at once; similarly, one may wish to estimate several policy-value components or multiple weighted ATEs simultaneously. This motivates extending the benchmark from a scalar parameter to a vector target. Let θ(P0) ∈ Rp be a pathwise differentiable vector parameter, and let φ¯e(O) ∈ Rp denote the corresponding efficient influence function. For estimators that are locally unbiased along all one-dimensional least-favorable directions, applying Theorem 1 to each linear functional yields the matrix lower bound: Cov( ˆθ) ⪰ 1

n Eφ¯e(O)φ¯e(O)⊤ . (5) Taking the trace provides the corresponding lower bound on total squared error: 

E ˆθ − θ(P0) 2

≥ 1

n E

h

∥φ¯e(O)∥2i

. (6) The matrix bound in (5) is crucial when one requires the full covariance structure of a vector estimator. However, in many experimental settings, a natural scalar summary of performance is the total squared error across coordinates, leading to the L2-risk bound in (6). This criterion is especially intuitive for vector ATE problems, where the experimenter seeks to estimate several arm-specific treatment effects simultaneously and desires a design that minimizes aggregate estimation error across all coordinates. Using the structural representation from Lemma 1, define: 

Ma(x) := Eva(X, Y )va(X, Y )⊤ | X = x, A = a , a ∈ A .

These matrices capture the arm-specific conditional second-moment contribution of the efficient influence function. Substituting the EIF decomposition into the risk bound yields: 

E ∥φ¯e(O)∥2 = E ∥g(X) − θ(P0)∥2 + E

"X

> a∈A

tr( Ma(X)) ¯ea(X)

#

.

Absent additional design constraints, minimizing the integrand pointwise over all probability vec-tors ( ea(x)) a∈A produces: 

e⋆a(x) = 

ptr( Ma(x)) 

P

> j∈A

ptr( Mj (x)) , a ∈ A . (7) Equation (7) offers a direct design implication of the lower bound: treatment arms that are more difficult to evaluate precisely for the target metric should receive greater experimental exposure. In 14 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

the special case of a binary average treatment effect, this reduces to the classical Neyman allocation rule. More generally, it yields an estimand-specific generalized Neyman allocation principle for multi-treatment experiments and, notably, for vector-valued ATE targets. When the target is the vector of treatment effects for several arms relative to a baseline, the optimal design is governed not by any single contrast in isolation, but by the joint second-moment structure of the efficient influence function across coordinates. To interpret this practically, suppose a platform is comparing several AI service variants, and one variant exhibits substantially higher conditional variability in task quality or resolution rate than the others. That specific arm should receive more traffic if the goal is to minimize the overall estimation error of the target metric. In this manner, the lower bound does not merely characterize a limit; it points directly to a concrete allocation principle for efficient experimentation. 

3.3 Discussion and connection to the rest of the paper 

This section has addressed the benchmark question for a broad class of non-anticipating experi-ment designs. By isolating the induced average propensity score as the central benchmark object, Theorem 1 provides a common language for evaluating complex experimental structures. From a theoretical perspective, this benchmark unifies several efficiency bounds that have recently been investigated in distinct areas of the experimental-design literature. Existing results for sequential adaptive experiments (Armstrong 2022) and highly stratified designs (Bai et al. 2023, Cai and Rafi 2024) operate under fundamentally different assumptions and do not subsume one another; yet, both fall naturally within the present framework of non-anticipating designs. The average-propensity benchmark developed here therefore provides a unified foundation across these previously disparate settings. To further illustrate its generality, we apply this framework to resolve an existing conjecture regarding the semiparametric efficiency bound in two-stage experimental designs (Cytrynbaum 2021). In such settings, an experimenter facing budget constraints must first select a subset of eligible units before determining their treatment assignments; our benchmark systematically accommodates this sequential selection-and-assignment mechanism. This framework also extends naturally beyond scalar targets to vector-valued estimands. This is particularly relevant for the multi-treatment settings that motivate our applications, where the object of interest is often a vector of treatment effects rather than a single scalar contrast. In such scenarios, the benchmark characterizes the achievable covariance structure of the estimator and provides a joint allocation principle through the generalized Neyman rule in (7). This average-propensity perspective also provides a simple way to incorporate application-specific operational constraints. In many experiments, the assignment rule must satisfy exposure limits, treatment-budget constraints, fairness requirements across subgroups, or other rollout restrictions. Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 15 

Such restrictions can be represented through an admissible class of average propensities, say Efeas .The relevant oracle benchmark is then obtained by minimizing the same semiparametric objective over Efeas rather than over the full simplex. Thus, constraints affect the benchmark through the set of achievable average propensities, while the lower-bound principle itself remains unchanged: once a design induces an average propensity ¯ e, its first-order efficiency limit is governed by the i.i.d. benchmark evaluated at ¯ e. The constructive sections below focus on standard implementable classes of batched designs, while this viewpoint leaves room for application-specific constraints to be imposed through the propensity-update step. Most importantly for the remainder of the paper, the induced average propensity score serves two roles. It is the sufficient summary of the design for the information-theoretic lower bound, and it also acts as the explicit target object for the constructive design problem. Guided by this bench-mark, the subsequent sections develop two complementary batched adaptive routes to approach the same semiparametric efficiency limit: Section 4 achieves this through estimator-side correction via regression adjustment, while Section 5 does so through design-side control via covariate balancing. 

4. Achieving Semiparametric Efficiency via Regression Adjustment 

Having characterized the semiparametric efficiency benchmark through the induced average propensity score in Section 3, we now turn to the first constructive route for approaching that benchmark. This section studies estimator-side correction through batched adaptive regression adjustment. We show that the oracle benchmark V ⋆/n can be approached by a practical batched design, but that the required conditions depend fundamentally on the structure of the estimand. In particular, we first establish a general achievability result, and then show that for linear functionals of the outcome mean the regression-adjustment route becomes substantially sharper because the plug-in bias cancels exactly. 

4.1 Setup, Oracle Objective, and Batched Cross-Fitted Design 

We observe n rounds of data Ot = ( Xt, A t, Y t) with treatments At ∈ A = {1, . . . , K }. The non-anticipating experiment is conducted in B batches with index sets {I b}Bb=1 and batch sizes γb := 

|I b|. Within each batch b, the assignment rule e(b)(·) is fixed and measurable with respect to the pre-batch history Hb. Consequently, conditional on Hb, the observations within batch b are i.i.d. Recall from Lemma 1 that the efficient influence function (EIF) for a target parameter θ(P0)under propensity e takes the form 

φe(O) =  g(X) − θ + X

> a∈A

1{A = a}

ea(X) va(X, Y ).

To isolate the design problem, we define the conditional second-moment function 

ma(x) := Eva(X, Y )2 | X = x, A = a , a ∈ A . (8) 16 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity  

> Figure 3 Illustration of the workflow of regression adjustment.

The oracle design objective over a feasible class E is then 

L(e) := E

"X

> a∈A

ma(X)

ea(X)

#

, e⋆ ∈ arg min  

> e∈E

L(e), (9) and the corresponding oracle semiparametric benchmark variance is 

V ⋆ := Var  g(X) − θ + L(e⋆).

Our regression-adjustment route uses a batched cross-fitted design with three ingredients. First, the sample is split into two folds to separate design learning from final EIF evaluation. Second, at the end of each batch, past data from one fold are used to estimate the second-moment proxy and update the target propensity for the opposite fold by plug-in minimization of the oracle design objective. Third, after all batches are completed, the final estimator is formed by cross-fitted EIF evaluation using the realized logging propensities. This design requires only a logarithmic number of policy updates, is naturally compatible with delayed feedback, and preserves conditional i.i.d. structure within each batch. Full implementation details are deferred to Appendix A.1. The remainder of this section shows that approaching the oracle rate V ⋆/n reduces to controlling two sources of error: nuisance estimation error (model estimation) and the regret from learning the assignment rule (design optimization). The next subsection introduces an excess-risk decomposition that organizes the analysis of the general and linear-functional regimes. 

4.2 The Excess-Risk Decomposition 

This subsection provides the organizing device for the rest of the analysis. We introduce two infeasible oracle estimators: ˜θ, which uses the true nuisance parameters but the realized sequence of designs, and θ⋆n, which uses the true nuisance parameters together with the oracle design e⋆. To isolate the sources of suboptimality, we expand the mean squared error of the feasible estimator ˆθ.Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 17 

Proposition 1 (Excess MSE decomposition) . The excess risk of the feasible estimator ˆθ

decomposes exactly into three components: 

E

h

(ˆθ − θ)2

i

− E(θ⋆n − θ)2 = E

h

(ˆθ − ˜θ)2

i| {z }

> model estimation

+



E

h

(˜θ − θ)2

i

− E(θ⋆n − θ)2 | {z }

> design optimization

+ 2 E

h

(ˆθ − ˜θ)( ˜θ − θ)

i| {z }

> interaction term

.

(10) The model estimation term measures the cost of plugging estimated nuisance parameters into the EIF. The design optimization term measures the suboptimality of the learned propensities relative to the oracle design. The interaction term captures the coupling between nuisance error and design regret. The behavior of this interaction term—specifically, whether plug-in bias persists or cancels exactly—is what distinguishes the general EIF case from the linear-functional case. 

4.3 General EIF Scores: A Baseline and the n−1/4 Bottleneck 

We first derive a baseline achievability result for general smooth estimands whose efficient influ-ence functions admit the representation in Lemma 1. The purpose of this subsection is deliberately modest. It shows that the average-propensity benchmark can be approached by batched regres-sion adjustment under standard orthogonality and second-order remainder conditions, but it also identifies the familiar nuisance-estimation bottleneck that prevents sharper conclusions in full gen-erality. Let η denote the collection of nuisance components entering the EIF score, and let d(·, ·) be a pseudo-metric measuring nuisance error. The key structural condition is Neyman orthogonality :the pathwise derivative of the expected EIF score vanishes at the true nuisance η0. Together with common regularity conditions collected in Assumption D.1 in Appendix D, this condition removes the first-order effect of nuisance estimation. What remains, however, is generally a second-order plug-in bias. As a result, the interaction term in (10) need not vanish exactly and must be controlled indirectly. This general framework covers nonlinear smooth targets. For example, consider the quantile treatment effect 

θ = q1(τ ) − q0(τ ), qa(τ ) := F −1 

> Y(a)

(τ ).

Let 

Ga(y | x) := Pr( Y ≤ y | X = x, A = a)and let fa(qa) denote the marginal density of Y (a) at qa(τ ). The arm-specific EIF for qa(τ ) is 

ϕqa (O) = −fa(qa)−1



Ga(qa | X) − τ + 1{A = a}

ea(X) {1{Y ≤ qa} − Ga(qa | X)}



.

Thus ϕQTE = ϕq1 − ϕq0 , and the arm-specific residual entering the EIF representation is 

va(X, Y ) = 1{Y ≤ qa} − Ga(qa | X)

fa(qa) .18 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Consequently, the design-relevant second moment is 

ma(x) = Ga(qa | x){1 − Ga(qa | x)}

fa(qa)2 .

The nuisance vector η = ( qa, f a(qa), G a(qa | · )) a∈{ 0,1} enters through the natural arm-wise pseudo-metric, and Assumption D.1 holds under standard smoothness at the target quantiles. Linear targets such as ATEs and policy values are treated separately in Section 4.4, because they enjoy a stronger algebraic cancellation that is not available for general EIF scores. 

Theorem 2 (Model estimation bound) . Under Assumption D.1, with B batches, the model-estimation error satisfies 

E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] ≲ Bn2

> B

X

> b=1

γb Ed(ˆ ηb, η 0)2| {z }

> variance

+ Bn2

> B

X

> b=1

γ2 

> b

Ed(ˆ ηb, η 0)4| {z }

> squared bias

. (11) Theorem 2 makes the bottleneck explicit. If d(ˆ ηb, η 0) = OP (n−α), then, up to logarithmic factors from the number of batches, the variance term is of order n−1−2α and is therefore o(1 /n ) for any 

α > 0. By contrast, the squared-bias term is of order n−4α and is o(1 /n ) only when α > 1/4. Thus, for general EIF scores, batched regression adjustment reaches the oracle benchmark only under the classical nuisance-rate condition α > 1/4. This bottleneck is not caused by adaptivity itself. It arises because Neyman orthogonality removes only the local first-order effect of nuisance estimation, leaving a second-order plug-in bias. The batched structure is still useful: conditional on the pre-batch history, the assignment rule is fixed within a batch, so nuisance estimation can rely on standard i.i.d. methods batch by batch. The limitation is that, for general EIF scores, this i.i.d. nuisance estimation must be sufficiently fast. We next control the design-optimization term by relating regret in (9) to the accuracy of the second-moment proxies. 

Theorem 3 (Design learning bound) . If the assignment rules e(b) are updated by approx-imately minimizing (9) using second-moment estimates ˆm(b), then the cumulative design regret satisfies 

E

h

(˜θ − θ)2

i

− E(θ⋆n − θ)2 ≲ 1

n2

> B

X

> b=2

γb E

"X

> a∈A

  ˆm(b−1)  

> a

(X) − ma(X)2

#

. (12) Thus, consistency of the second-moment proxies is enough to make the design-learning term o(1 /n ). Combining Theorems 2 and 3 gives the following baseline achievability result. 

Corollary 1 (Baseline achievability for general EIF scores) . Under Assumption D.1, if the second-moment proxies are consistent and the full nuisance parameter is estimated at a rate strictly faster than n−1/4, then Algorithm 1 achieves the semiparametric efficiency benchmark: 

E[( ˆθ − θ)2] = V ⋆

n + o(1 /n ).Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 19 

The next subsection shows that this nuisance-rate bottleneck disappears for linear functionals of the outcome mean. There, the regression-adjusted IPW score is globally unbiased for every candidate regression function, so the second-order plug-in bias in (11) vanishes identically rather than merely becoming small. 

4.4 Linear Functionals: Exact Cancellation and Sharp Rates 

We now turn to the a more interesting regime of the regression-adjustment route. Many experi-mental targets of primary practical interest are linear functionals of the arm-specific conditional means: 

θ = E

"X

> a∈A

ωa(X)μa(X)

#

,

where the weights {ωa}a∈A are known. This class includes average treatment effects, weighted and subgroup average treatment effects, and policy values under a fixed target policy. For this class, the general n−1/4 nuisance-rate bottleneck disappears entirely. The reason is structural. For general EIF scores, Neyman orthogonality removes only the local first-order effect of nuisance estimation, leaving a second-order plug-in bias of order d(ˆ η, η 0)2. Lin-ear functionals enjoy a stronger property. Because the target is linear in μa and the EIF correction uses inverse-probability weighting, the plug-in error in any candidate regression function ˜ μa cancels algebraically, arm by arm. Thus the score is globally unbiased for every candidate regression func-tion, not merely locally orthogonal at the truth. For a linear functional, the regression-adjusted IPW score is 

ψ(O; μ, e ) = X

> a∈A

ωa(X)μa(X) + X

> a∈A

1{A = a}

ea(X) ωa(X) Y − μa(X) − θ. (13) The next proposition records the exact cancellation property. 

Proposition 2 (Exact global unbiasedness and cancellation) . For any candidate regres-sion function ˜μ = {˜μa}a∈A ,

E[ψ(O; ˜ μ, e ) | X] = X

> a∈A

ωa(X)μa(X) − θ, E[ψ(O; ˜ μ, e )] = 0 . (14) 

Consequently, under cross-fitting, the interaction term in the excess-MSE decomposition vanishes exactly: 

E

h

(ˆθ − ˜θ)( ˜θ − θ)

i

= 0 .

The proof is immediate from conditional expectation. For each arm a,

E

 1{A = a}

ea(X) ωa(X) Y − ˜μa(X) X



= ωa(X) μa(X) − ˜μa(X),20 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

which exactly cancels the plug-in term ωa(X)˜ μa(X) in (13). Hence the plug-in bias is not merely second-order small; it is identically zero. This exact cancellation changes the rate analysis. In the general EIF case, the model-estimation bound contains a squared-bias term, which forces the nuisance-rate condition α > 1/4. In the linear-functional case, that term vanishes. The remaining model-estimation cost is purely a variance contribution from learning the regression functions. The design-learning cost is governed separately by the accuracy with which the design-relevant second moments are estimated. To state the rate result, define 

ma(x) := ωa(x)2σ2

> a

(x), σ2

> a

(x) := Var (Y | X = x, A = a).

Then the oracle design objective for the linear-functional problem is 

L(e) = E

"X

> a∈A

ma(X)

ea(X)

#

.

Thus, two nuisance objects matter for the rate analysis: the outcome regressions {μa}a∈A , which enter the final regression-adjusted estimator, and the second-moment functions {ma}a∈A , which determine the optimal design. Because the experiment is batched, the assignment rule is fixed within each batch conditional on the pre-batch history. Hence the nuisance learners can be analyzed using standard conditional i.i.d. arguments within each batch. We impose the following batchwise rate condition. 

Assumption 1 (Nuisance-rate conditions for linear functionals) . There exist constants 

α, β > 0 and C < ∞ and estimators ˆμa and ˆma such that given n i.i.d. samples, 

E

"X

> a∈A

∥ˆμa − μa∥2 

> L2(PX)

#

≤ Cn −2α, and E

"X

> a∈A

∥ ˆma − ma∥2 

> L2(PX)

#

≤ Cn −2β . (15) Assumption 1 separates the two statistical tasks. The exponent α measures the difficulty of learning the outcome regressions used in the final regression-adjusted estimator. The exponent β measures the difficulty of learning the second-moment functions that drive the design update. Importantly, no threshold condition such as α > 1/4 is imposed. Any positive rates α, β > 0 are sufficient for first-order efficiency; their values determine only the second-order speed at which the feasible procedure approaches the oracle benchmark. 

Theorem 4 (Convergence-rate upper bound for linear functionals) . Under Assump-tion 1, with a logarithmic number of batches and the batched cross-fitted design in Algorithm 1, the model-estimation error satisfies 

E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] ≲ eO n−1−2α . (16) Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 21 

Furthermore, the design-optimization suboptimality satisfies 

E[( ˜θ − θ)2] − E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] = eO n−1−2β  . (17) 

Consequently, 

E[( ˆθ − θ)2] − V ⋆

n = eO n−1−2α ∨ n−1−2β  . (18) Theorem 4 gives more than asymptotic semiparametric efficiency. It characterizes the second-order gap to the oracle benchmark V ⋆/n . The two terms have distinct interpretations: n−1−2α is the cost of learning the outcome regressions used in the final regression-adjusted estimator, while n−1−2β is the cost of learning the design-relevant second moments used to update the assignment rule. It remains to ask whether these rates are intrinsic or merely artifacts of the analysis. The next result shows that the two rates are minimax-sharp, up to logarithmic factors. 

Theorem 5 (Matching convergence lower bound for linear functionals) . Fix α, β > 0

and consider a class of linear-functional environments for which the i.i.d. rate conditions in Assumption 1 are tight: the conditional means and the design-relevant second moments cannot be estimated faster than n−α and n−β , respectively. Then there exist subfamilies of environments such that, for any non-anticipating experiment and unbiased estimator pair (ALG , T ),

sup 

> P



Var P (T ) − V ⋆(P )

n



≳ n−1−2α ∨ n−1−2β (up to logarithmic factors) . (19) 

Equivalently, neither the model-estimation scale n−1−2α nor the design-learning scale n−1−2β above the oracle benchmark V ⋆/n can be improved in general. 

The proof uses two complementary Assouad-type constructions. The first construction fixes the arm variances and varies one arm’s conditional mean over a Gaussian-location hypercube, isolating the model-estimation cost. The second construction fixes the conditional means and varies one arm’s conditional variance, so that the oracle assignment rule itself changes across environments, isolating the design-learning cost. Full proofs are deferred to Appendix F.4.1. Combining Theorems 4 and 5, Algorithm 1 approaches the semiparametric benchmark at the minimax-optimal second-order rate: 

E[( ˆθ − θ)2] = V ⋆

n + eO n−1−2α ∨ n−1−2β  ,

up to logarithmic factors. 22 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity  

> Table 1 Achieving semiparametric efficiency via regression adjustment.

General estimands Linear functionals 

Plug-in bias E[∆ b, 1 | H b] O d(ˆ η, η 0)2̸ = 0 Exact zero Required nuisance estimation rate 

α > 1/4 Any α > 0Design-learning requirement Consistency of ˆ ma Any β > 0 for variance estimation Interaction term Controlled by Cauchy–Schwarz Exact zero Second-order convergence rate Asymptotic efficiency under 

α > 1/4, but no sharp second-order rate result Sharp optimal rate with matching lower bound 

4.5 Comparison and Transition 

The preceding analysis reveals a sharp dichotomy in the achievability of semiparametric efficiency under adaptive experimentation. The fundamental distinction is whether the plug-in bias remains only second-order small, or instead vanishes entirely. Table 1 summarizes this structural difference. The regression-adjustment route approaches the oracle benchmark via an estimator-side correction for dependent sequential data. However, as the general case demonstrates, this approach can place substantial statistical complexity on the final estimation step. When the plug-in bias is only second-order small, attaining the benchmark relies critically on the stringent n−1/4 convergence threshold for nuisance estimation. This operational reality motivates an alternative route to the same benchmark. Rather than concentrating statistical complexity in the estimator, the next section shifts this complexity directly into the assignment mechanism itself. There we show that the oracle rate V ⋆/n can be attained by design , through adaptive covariate balancing, while utilizing a simple, transparent moment-based estimator and completely bypassing the nuisance-rate bottleneck in the final estimation step. 

5. Achieving Semiparametric Efficiency via Covariate Balancing 

We now turn to the second constructive route for approaching the same benchmark V ⋆/n . Whereas Section 4 approaches the benchmark through estimator-side correction, this section approaches it by design . Crucially, this route does not require nonparametric nuisance estimation in the estimation step. The only nuisance quantity enters on the design side, through the second-moment object used to update target propensities across batches. 

5.1 Moment Condition and What Must Be Balanced 

We consider parameters θ0 ∈ Θ ⊆ Rq defined implicitly through a general moment condition 

E[m(X, A, Y, θ 0)] = 0 , (20) Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 23 

where m : X × A × Y × Θ → Rq is a known function that does not depend on unknown nuisance parameters. Let 

M := E

 ∂m ∂θ ⊤ (X, A, Y, θ 0)



denote the nonsingular Jacobian. The naive method-of-moments estimator ˆθn solves the sample analog 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

m(Xi, A i, Y i, ˆθn) = 0 . (21) The key advantage of this route is that the estimator itself is simple: it uses only the known moment function m and does not require nonparametric nuisance estimation in the estimation step. To analyze (21) under sequential experimental designs, we identify the covariate-dependent quantities that must be balanced. Define the arm-specific balance functions 

ωa(X) := −M −1 E[m(X, a, Y, θ 0) | X] . (22) These functions capture the directions that must be balanced for the target estimand. In this sense, covariate balancing is not merely balancing raw covariates; it is balancing the covariate-indexed components of the moment condition that affect first-order estimation error. For example, in the binary ATE case θ0 = E[Y (1) − Y (0)] , one may use the IPW moment 

mATE (X, A, Y, θ ) = 1{A = 1 }

e1(X) Y − 1{A = 0 }

e0(X) Y − θ. 

The corresponding estimand-relevant balance directions are, up to the propensity normalization embedded in the moment, 

ωa(X) = ( −1) 1−aμa(X), μa(X) = E[Y | X, A = a].

Thus, for the ATE, the design should balance the arm-specific outcome-regression functions rather than arbitrary covariate features. As a nonlinear example, consider the QTE 

θQTE 0 = q1(τ ) − q0(τ ), qa(τ ) := F −1 

> Y(a)

(τ ).

Using the arm-specific quantile moment 

mQ,a (X, A, Y, ϑ ) = 1{A = a}

ea(X)

 1{Y ≤ ϑa} − τ ,

the corresponding balance direction is 

ωa(X) = FY (a)|X (qa(τ )) − τfa(qa(τ )) ,

under standard smoothness at the target quantile. Additional examples, including policy value, are collected in Appendix C. The following decomposition is the structural core of this section; its full derivation is deferred to Appendix G.1. 24 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Figure 4 Illustration of the workflow of the covariate-balancing route. 

Proposition 3 (Structural decomposition) . Under standard regularity conditions for moment-based asymptotic linearity, if unit i is assigned treatment in a batch with target propensity 

e(b(i)) , then 

√n (ˆθn − θ0) = 1

√n

> n

X

> i=1

φe⋆ (Oi)

| {z }

> (I) Oracle EIF

+ 1

√n

> n

X

> i=1

φe(b(i)) (Oi) − φe⋆ (Oi)| {z }

> (II) Design Gap

+ 1

√n

> n

X

> i=1

X

> a∈A

 1{Ai = a} − e(b(i))  

> a

(Xi) ωa(Xi)

| {z }

> (III) Balancing Remainder

+oP (1) .

(23) Term (I) is the oracle EIF contribution and yields the target variance V ⋆. Term (II) is the cost of learning the optimal design. Term (III) is the balancing remainder. The design problem is therefore clear: make Term (III) small within batches and Term (II) small across batches. 

5.2 Two-Layer Batched Balancing Design 

This design mirrors Proposition 3: the within-batch layer targets the balancing remainder, while the across-batch layer targets the design gap. We divide the experiment into B batches and proceed in two layers: 

• Within-batch balancing. The target propensity e(b) is held fixed throughout batch b. As units arrive, the design enforces local balance relative to e(b) by combining spatial binning of the covariate space with grouped permutations within each bin. 

• Across-batch learning. At the end of batch b, the data from that batch are used to estimate the second-moment proxy ˆ m(b) by standard i.i.d. regression. The next-batch target propensity 

e(b+1) is then obtained by plug-in minimization of the oracle design objective. Full implementation details—including explicit rules for randomized rounding, open-tuple bound-ary handling, and bin-refresh conventions—are deferred to Appendix A.2. Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 25 

5.3 Within-Batch Balancing Guarantee 

We first isolate the within-batch balancing layer under a fixed target propensity e(b). The batch-level contribution to the balancing remainder is governed by the normalized imbalance 

Sb := 1

√γb

X

> t∈I b

X

> a∈A

 1{At = a} − e(b) 

> a

(Xt) ωa(Xt) ∈ Rq . (24) By enforcing local balance through spatial binning and within-bin grouped permutation, the design simultaneously controls this imbalance for all Lipschitz balance functions without requiring knowl-edge of the unknown ωa’s themselves. Detailed variance derivations and martingale arguments are deferred to Appendix G.4. 

Theorem 6 (Within-batch balancing remainder) . Assume the balance functions ωa are Lipschitz continuous. Under suitable geometric tuning of the bin diameter and tuple capacity for a batch of size m, the normalized imbalance satisfies 

∥Sb∥ = OP



m− 1

> d+4



= oP (1) . (25) Thus the within-batch balancing remainder is negligible. The rate in (25) is dimension dependent, which is the main statistical cost of the design-side route. 

5.4 Main Efficiency Theorem 

Operationally, each batch functions simultaneously as an online experiment for balancing and an offline i.i.d. regression sample for design learning. Combining the within-batch balancing guarantee with the across-batch design updates yields the main result of this section. 

Theorem 7 (Semiparametric efficiency via covariate balancing) . Assume the balance functions ωa are Lipschitz, the covariate space is compact, and the second-moment proxies satisfy 

E

"X

> a∈A

  ˆm(b) 

> a

(X) − ma(X)2

#

≲ γ−2βb (26) 

for some β > 0. Then, under the two-layer batched adaptive balancing design, 

E

h

(ˆθn − θ0)2

i

= V ⋆

n + o

 1

n



. (27) The result follows by controlling each term in Proposition 3. First, Theorem 6 makes the within-batch balancing remainder negligible. Second, the plug-in updates based on (26) make the cumula-tive design gap negligible. Third, the oracle EIF term contributes the target variance V ⋆. Detailed rate calculations are deferred to Appendix G.5. 26 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

5.5 Comparison and Implications 

This second constructive route provides a sharp contrast to the regression-adjustment strategy of Section 4. Both attain the same benchmark, but Section 4 operates through estimator-side correction, whereas the present section achieves the benchmark by design. By placing statistical complexity in the assignment mechanism, the balancing route avoids the familiar n−1/4 estimator-side nuisance bottleneck. The final estimator remains simple and robust. The tradeoff is geometric: the balancing remainder decays at the dimension-dependent rate in (25). Consequently, the design-side route is especially attractive in structured, lower-dimensional settings, whereas estimator-side correction is often preferable when reliable high-dimensional nonparametric learners are available. A central operational takeaway is that both constructive routes require design updates only at batch boundaries. This aligns directly with the lower-bound theory of Section 3, which shows that the relevant sufficient summary for statistical efficiency is the induced average propensity score. By separating the timescales into within-batch balancing and across-batch learning, the design yields low switching costs and natural compatibility with delayed feedback. Both routes target the same average-propensity benchmark, but place complexity in different locations. 

6. Numerical Study 

We complement the theoretical analysis with a numerical study covering synthetic simulations and a real-data application. The synthetic simulations examine how the two constructive routes— batched cross-fitted regression adjustment (RA, Algorithm 1) and batched adaptive covariate bal-ancing (CB, Algorithm 2)—approach the semiparametric benchmark V ⋆ in controlled environments where heteroskedasticity, cross-arm variance contrast, and covariate dimension can be varied. The real-data application then applies the same design principles to an AI medical-assistant evalua-tion, where the target is naturally multi-armed: we estimate the vector treatment effect of several assistants relative to a common baseline, using covariates that are operationally interpretable. Across all experiments, we compare the adaptive designs with three reference points. The first is uniform i.i.d. assignment with the cross-fitted EIF estimator, which serves as the no-design baseline. The second is the oracle Neyman i.i.d. design with the same estimator, denoted oracle iid, which represents the i.i.d. design benchmark when the optimal propensity is known. The third is the oracle balanced design, denoted oracle cb , which uses the true generalized Neyman propensity inside Algorithm 2 and represents the design-side benchmark for the balancing route. The two feasible adaptive algorithms are denoted alg1 ra for RA and alg2 cb for CB. We report normalized mean squared error n · MSE, paired differences against uniform with ±2 SE intervals, and a verdict that marks a method as BEATS when the paired improvement exceeds two standard errors, ties when the interval covers zero, and LOSES when the paired loss exceeds two standard errors. Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 27 

6.1 Synthetic experiments 

We first construct a continuous-Gaussian DGP indexed by an ambient dimension d ∈ { 2, 3, 8}.Covariates are drawn as X ∼ N (0 , I d) and there are K = 4 arms. The conditional mean and variance of the outcome are 

μa(X) = αa + β⊤ 

> a

X, log σ2

> a

(X) = ca + γ⊤ 

> a

X1:2 , Y | X, A = a ∼ N  μa(X), σ 2

> a

(X).

The first two covariates drive the signal: the coefficients βa load primarily on dimensions 1 and 2, and the log-variance slopes γa are nonzero only along these two dimensions. Cross-arm het-eroskedasticity is induced through the intercept schedule c = ( −2.0, −0.7, 0.7, 2.0), which creates substantial differences in arm-specific noise levels. The remaining d − 2 covariates are weakly infor-mative or near-noise, yet they are still passed to every nuisance learner. Thus, the high-dimensional regime tests whether the adaptive designs can exploit a low effective dimension in the presence of irrelevant covariates. We instantiate npop = 5 × 10 4 population units and draw n = 10 4 sample units per replication, with 3000 replications per cell. Replications share random seeds across methods, so the paired differences below are computed under common random numbers. We evaluate three estimands. The scalar ATE compares arms 2 and 4, 

θATE = E[μ4(X) − μ2(X)] .

The marginal median quantile treatment effect compares the same arm pair at τ = 0 .5, 

θQTE = F −1 

> Y(4)

(0 .5) − F −1 

> Y(2)

(0 .5) .

The vector ATE compares all three active arms against the common reference arm ar = 3, 

θvATE = ( E[μa(X) − μ3(X)]) a̸=3 ,

and is evaluated under trace MSE. For each estimand, the RA estimator is the cross-fitted AIPW form developed in Section 4; for the QTE, it uses an EIF-derived AIPW estimator of the marginal CDF followed by grid inversion. The CB estimator is the moment-based estimator of Section 5: an inverse-propensity-weighted average for linear estimands and a weighted-quantile estimator for the QTE. Nuisance regressions use gradient-boosted trees (XGBoost) with 50 trees and depth 3. Table 2 reports the nine main cells. The oracle benchmarks confirm sizable design value: relative to uniform assignment, the oracle i.i.d. design oracle iid improves normalized MSE in every cell, and the oracle balanced design oracle cb also improves performance throughout. The feasible RA algorithm alg1 ra is consistently beneficial across all estimands and dimensions, tracking the 28 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

oracle i.i.d. benchmark especially closely for scalar estimands. The feasible CB algorithm alg2 cb 

is beneficial in most cells, with performance depending more strongly on the geometry of the balancing step: it ties uniform for the ATE at d = 2 and loses for the QTE at d = 8 under the default all-feature binning rule. This pattern is consistent with the theory in Section 5, where the balancing remainder depends on the effective dimension of the covariate partition. 

Table 2 Synthetic experiments at n = 10 4, 3000 replications. Each block reports normalized MSE ( n · MSE ) and the paired improvement over uniform ±2 SE . Bold entries beat uniform with statistical significance; italics lose; un-emphasized entries are ties.                                                                                                                       

> ATE ( μ4−μ2)QTE ( τ= 0 .5) Vector ATE (trace MSE) Method d= 2 d= 3 d= 8 d= 2 d= 3 d= 8 d= 2 d= 3 d= 8
> V⋆14.7 15.2 29.9 21.9 20.8 20.9 52.0 63.0 72.8 uniform 20.3 21.7 38.8 28.7 26.4 25.0 76.4 99.6 118.4
> oracle iid 14.4 15.5 30.3 21.6 21.4 19.6 52.1 67.5 78.0
> paired ±2SE +5.9 ±1.3 +6.2 ±1.4 +8.5 ±2.5 +7.1 ±1.8 +5.1 ±1.7 +5.4 ±1.6 +24.4 ±3.6 +32.0 ±4.9 +40.4 ±5.3
> oracle cb 17.2 19.2 31.3 25.3 23.2 22.8 63.0 81.0 83.1
> paired ±2SE +3.1 ±1.3 +2.4 ±1.5 +7.5 ±2.5 +3.4 ±2.0 +3.3 ±1.7 +2.2 ±1.7 +13.4 ±3.7 +18.6 ±5.0 +35.2 ±5.4
> alg1 cf 15.7 16.5 32.7 23.6 23.2 22.3 62.6 73.7 91.2
> paired ±2SE +4.6 ±1.3 +5.2 ±1.4 +6.1 ±2.6 +5.1 ±1.9 +3.3 ±1.8 +2.7 ±1.7 +13.8 ±3.8 +25.8 ±5.0 +27.2 ±5.6
> alg2 cb 19.1 19.2 35.1 25.9 24.6 28.9 67.0 89.5 105.3
> paired ±2SE +1.3 ±1.5 +2.5 ±1.5 +3.8 ±2.6 +2.8 ±2.0 +1.9 ±1.8 −3.9±1.9 +9.5 ±3.9 +10.1 ±5.3 +13.1 ±5.8

The table highlights three empirical lessons. First, oracle iid delivers the largest and most stable improvements, showing that the average-propensity benchmark is attainable when the opti-mal propensity is known. Second, alg1 ra captures a large share of this gain using only batched updates, suggesting that the plug-in design based on learned nuisance functions is effective in this DGP. Third, alg2 cb illustrates the main tradeoff of the design-side route. When the balancing partition is aligned with the low-dimensional structure of the DGP, CB can approach its oracle bal-ancing benchmark; when the partition is formed over all ambient covariates, irrelevant dimensions can reduce the within-bin sample size and inflate the balancing remainder. To isolate this high-dimensional effect, we re-run the d = 8 cells with two binning schemes. The 

full scheme bins on all eight covariates, matching the default CB implementation in Table 2. The 

top-2 scheme bins only on dimensions 1–2, while still allowing the nuisance regressions to use all eight covariates. This top-2 scheme corresponds to the effective-dimension principle suggested by the rate in Theorem 7: the geometric part of the balancing design should be built on the covariates that drive treatment-effect or variance heterogeneity. 

Table 3 d = 8 , n = 10 4: full versus top-2 design across estimands. Diff = nMSE(full) − nMSE(top-2); a positive diff means top-2 binning is more accurate. 

Estimand RA alg1 ra (full vs. top-2) CB alg2 cb (full vs. top-2) Interpretation ATE 32 .7 vs 32 .4 (+0.3 ±2.6) 35 .1 vs 33 .5 (+1.6 ±2.6) CB modestly improves QTE 22 .3 vs 21 .8 (+0.5 ±1.6) 28 .9 vs 23 .6 (+4.6 ±1.9 ) CB requires top-2 vector ATE 91 .2 vs 90 .1 (+1.1 ±4.7) 105 .3 vs 93 .5 (+8.9 ±5.1 ) CB requires top-2 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 29 

Table 3 confirms this interpretation. RA is nearly insensitive to the binning choice because the assignment rule is learned through flexible regressions that can screen out the six near-noise dimen-sions. CB is more sensitive. For the QTE and vector ATE, top-2 binning substantially improves normalized MSE relative to full binning, closing much of the gap created by the all-feature partition. This finding gives an implementation lesson for balancing-based sequential designs: in moderate or high ambient dimension, the balancing partition should be constructed using a low-dimensional summary of the covariates, obtained from prior knowledge, pilot data, or a preliminary heterogene-ity screen. In contrast, the RA route can rely more directly on the implicit regularization of the nuisance learner. 

6.2 Application: HELPMed AI medical-assistant evaluation 

We next apply the same methodology to an evaluation experiment for AI medical assistants from the HELPMed study (Bean et al. 2026). The dataset contains npop = 2400 interactions between 1298 participants and one of four AI assistants ( K = 4) across 10 clinically grounded scenarios. The four arms correspond to a baseline assistant and three competitor variants. The outcome Y

is binary and indicates whether the participant’s chosen disposition matches the gold-standard answer for the scenario. The original experiment used uniform 1 /K randomization, yielding exactly 600 interactions per arm; this provides a natural empirical reference point for assessing adaptive designs. Since some participants contribute multiple interactions, the estimand in this exercise is interpreted at the interaction level, matching the unit at which treatment assignment and outcomes are recorded. We use a d = 6 covariate vector: scenario id (10 clinical vignettes, such as chest pain, head injury triage, and pediatric fever), age band (six ordinal bands), education (five ordinal levels), 

online health (frequency of online health-information seeking), llms health info (frequency of LLM use for health questions), and sex male . To construct a low-dimensional design variant, we run a causal-forest variable-importance screen at the end of each batch using the accumulated data, and use the two highest-ranked covariates to update the next-batch design. In most replications and batches, this procedure selects scenario id and age band , suggesting that these two variables carry most of the treatment-effect heterogeneity signal. This creates a real-data analogue of the effective-dimension issue in Section 6.1: the balancing design may either operate on all six covariates or use an adaptively selected low-dimensional partition. The target is the vector ATE of the three competitor assistants relative to the baseline assistant, 

θ = ( E[μa(X) − μ3(X)]) a∈{ 1,2,4} ∈ R3, evaluated under trace MSE. This estimand captures the joint comparison needed when the goal is to rank several assistant variants against a common deployment baseline. We use the HELPMed sample as an empirical finite population, draw resamples of size n ∈30 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

{1200 , 2400 , 4800 } in each replication, and evaluate the two adaptive algorithms together with the two oracle ceilings over 5000 replications per cell. The nuisance regressions use the same gradient-boosted-tree configuration as in the synthetic simulations. For both adaptive routes, we compare a full-feature design with a batchwise top-2 design. In the full-feature design, the propensity update uses all six covariates and the CB route forms bins over the full covariate vector. In the top-2 design, the next-batch design is based on the two covariates selected by the causal-forest screen at the previous batch boundary; for CB, these two covariates define the spatial partition used for balancing.          

> Table 4 HELPMed vector ATE under normalized trace MSE. The target benchmark is V⋆= 4 .515 . The top-2 design uses batchwise causal-forest screening to select two covariates for the next-batch design; in most batches, the selected variables are scenario id and age band . Bold entries beat uniform with statistical significance under paired ±2 SE intervals; un-emphasized entries are ties.

Full-feature design ( d = 6) Batchwise top-2 design 

n 1200 2400 4800 1200 2400 4800 uniform 5.43 5.27 5.10 5.43 5.27 5.10 

oracle iid 5.08 5.00 4.81 — — —paired ±2SE +0.35 ±0.20 +0.27 ±0.19 +0.29 ±0.19 

oracle cb 4.73 4.77 4.84 — — —paired ±2SE +0.70 ±0.20 +0.49 ±0.19 +0.26 ±0.20 

alg1 ra 5.28 5.02 5.00 5.20 4.99 4.82 

paired ±2SE +0.15 ±0.20 +0.24 ±0.20 +0.10 ±0.20 +0.23 ±0.21 +0.28 ±0.20 +0.28 ±0.20 

alg2 cb 5.03 4.84 4.97 5.03 4.87 4.81 

paired ±2SE +0.39 ±0.21 +0.43 ±0.19 +0.13 ±0.20 +0.40 ±0.21 +0.40 ±0.19 +0.29 ±0.20 

Table 4 shows that the average-propensity design principle continues to produce meaningful gains in a realistic multi-arm evaluation. The two oracle designs improve over uniform randomization in all three sample-size regimes, with oracle cb giving the largest improvement at n = 1200 and 

oracle iid remaining stable across sample sizes. Among feasible adaptive designs, alg2 cb delivers the strongest gains at n = 1200 and n = 2400, reducing normalized trace MSE from 5 .43 to about 5.03 at n = 1200 and from 5 .27 to about 4 .84–4 .87 at n = 2400. At n = 4800, the batchwise top-2 versions of both adaptive routes remain statistically beneficial, while the full-feature versions are closer to uniform within Monte Carlo error. This pattern is consistent with the synthetic high-dimensional experiment: when the balancing partition spreads a few thousand observations over a large Cartesian grid, the finite-sample balancing remainder can offset part of the design gain. The feature-screening comparison is also informative. For alg1 ra , using the batchwise top-2 screen in the design update slightly improves performance in all three sample-size regimes, although the differences are modest. For alg2 cb , batchwise top-2 binning performs similarly to full-feature binning at n = 1200 and n = 2400, and improves clearly at n = 4800, where the full 10 × 6 × 5 ×Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 31 

6 × 6 × 2 = 10 ,800-cell grid is especially sparse relative to the realized sample size. The application therefore reinforces the implementation lesson from Table 3: a balancing-based design should use a low-dimensional, data-adaptive partition, while flexible regression learners can continue to use the richer covariate set. The managerial implications are straightforward. In this application, the oracle benchmarks suggest that efficient allocation could reduce normalized trace MSE by roughly 5–13% relative to the original uniform design, and the feasible adaptive algorithms deliver statistically significant reductions of about 5–8% in their strongest cells. Since normalized MSE plays the role of the variance constant in the 1 /n rate, these gains translate approximately into the same percentage reduction in the number of interactions needed to achieve a fixed precision target. The gains are especially relevant for multi-assistant evaluation, where decision-makers care about the joint ranking of several variants rather than a single binary contrast. The empirical pattern also suggests a deployable workflow: after each batch, run a lightweight heterogeneity screen to select a small set of design covariates, use those covariates in the next-batch propensity update and CB partition, and update assignment probabilities only at batch boundaries. 

7. Conclusion 

This paper develops a unified framework for characterizing and designing efficient experiments. The central object is the induced average propensity score: every non-anticipating design induces such a score, and the corresponding semiparametric efficiency benchmark is given by the i.i.d. efficiency bound evaluated at this induced propensity. This result shows that the statistical effect of complex adaptive, balanced, or otherwise dependent assignment mechanisms can be summarized through a single design object. It also turns experimental design into the problem of choosing or learning an efficient average propensity, yielding generalized Neyman allocation principles for scalar and vector-valued causal estimands. We further show that this benchmark can be approached by practical batched adaptive designs through two complementary routes. The regression-adjustment route learns the target propensity and uses efficient-influence-function-based estimation, while the covariate-balancing route achieves the same benchmark through assignment-side balance and simple moment-based estimation. Both approaches require only a small number of policy updates, making them compatible with delayed feedback and operational deployment. Taken together, the results suggest that average propensity provides a useful language for understanding the statistical limits of sequential experimentation and for designing efficient multi-treatment experiments in modern applications such as AI-enabled service evaluation. 32 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

References 

Armstrong, T. B. (2022). Asymptotic efficiency bounds for a class of experimental designs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02726 .Bai, Y. (2022). Optimality of matched-pair designs in randomized controlled trials. American Economic Review 112 (12), 3911–3940. Bai, Y., J. Liu, A. M. Shaikh, and M. Tabord-Meehan (2023). On the efficiency of finely stratified experiments. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15181 .Bean, A. M., R. E. Payne, G. Parsons, H. R. Kirk, J. Ciro, R. Mosquera-G´ omez, S. Hincapi´ e M, A. S. Ekanayaka, L. Tarassenko, L. Rocher, et al. (2026). Reliability of llms as medical assistants for the general public: a randomized preregistered study. Nature Medicine , 1–7. Budzyn, A. et al. (2025). The deskilling effect of artificial intelligence in clinical endoscopy: observational evidence. Nature Medicine (or relevant clinical journal placeholder) . As cited in your text. Cai, Y. and A. Rafi (2024). On the performance of the neyman allocation with small pilots. Journal of Econometrics 242 (1), 105793. Cook, T., A. Mishler, and A. Ramdas (2024). Semiparametric efficient inference in adaptive experiments. In Causal Learning and Reasoning , pp. 1033–1064. PMLR. Cytrynbaum, M. (2021). Optimal stratification of survey experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08157 .Cytrynbaum, M. (2024). Finely stratified rerandomization designs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03279 .Dai, J., P. Gradu, and C. Harshaw (2023). Clip-ogd: An experimental design for adaptive neyman allocation in sequential experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17187 .Dietvorst, B. J., J. P. Simmons, and C. Massey (2015). Algorithm aversion: People erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 144 (1), 114–126. Gilotte, A., C. Calauz` enes, T. Nedelec, A. Abraham, and S. Doll´ e (2018). Offline a/b testing for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining , pp. 198–206. Hu, F. and W. F. Rosenberger (2006). The theory of response-adaptive randomization in clinical trials . John Wiley & Sons. Kato, M., T. Ishihara, J. Honda, and Y. Narita (2020). Efficient adaptive experimental design for average treatment effect estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05308 .Li, J., D. Simchi-Levi, and Y. Zhao (2024). Optimal adaptive experimental design for estimating treatment effect. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05552 .Li, X., P. Ding, and D. B. Rubin (2018). Asymptotic theory of rerandomization in treatment–control experiments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 (37), 9157–9162. Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 33 Newey, W. K. (1994). The asymptotic variance of semiparametric estimators. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 1349–1382. Rafi, A. (2023). Efficient semiparametric estimation of average treatment effects under covariate adaptive randomization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08340 .Van der Vaart, A. W. (2000). Asymptotic statistics , Volume 3. Cambridge university press. Zhao, J. (2023). Adaptive neyman allocation. 

A. Algorithms 

This appendix gives the formal algorithmic specification of the two routes studied in the main text: the batched cross-fitted regression-adjustment estimator analyzed in Section 4 and the batched adaptive covariate-balancing procedure analyzed in Section 5. Both algorithms share a common batch schedule and cross-fitting convention, which we state once for reference. 

Common batch schedule. We index batches by b = 1 , . . . , B with B ≍ log n and geometric batch sizes γb ≍ nb/B . This makes the final batch contain a constant fraction of all units while keeping the number of design updates logarithmic in the sample size. All population expectations inside design updates are replaced by empirical averages over the pooled data from batches ≤ b.

Cross-fitting convention. Within each batch, the data are split into S folds (typically S = 2). For each fold s, nuisance estimates are fit on the remaining S − 1 folds and then applied to fold s. The final estimator averages the S fold-specific estimates to cancel first-order plug-in bias. 

A.1 Batched Cross-Fitted Regression Adjustment 

Algorithm 1 implements the regression-adjustment route. The procedure alternates between (i) updating the logging propensity e(b) at the start of each batch, (ii) running the batch under this propensity, and (iii) refitting nuisances on the pooled data at the end. The final estimator is a cross-fitted EIF plug-in. 34 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Algorithm 1: Batched Cross-Fitted Regression Adjustment 

Input: Sample size n; batch count B ≍ log n and sizes {γb}Bb=1 with P 

> b

γb = n; cross-fit folds S; propensity floor ε > 0; feasible class E; moment function m(X, A, Y, θ ). 

Output: Estimator ˆθn of θ(P0).  

> 1

Initialize e(1) ∈ E with e(1)  

> a

(x) ≥ ε for all ( a, x );  

> 2

for b = 1 , . . . , B do 

// Run batch b under logging propensity e(b) 

> 3

for each incoming unit i in batch b do  

> 4

Observe Xi, draw Ai ∼ e(b)(· | Xi), record Yi; 

> 5

end 

// End of batch: refit nuisances with cross-fitting  

> 6

Split batch-b data into S folds {I1, . . . , I S }; 

> 7

foreach fold s ∈ { 1, . . . , S } do  

> 8

Fit ˆ g(b, −s) and {ˆv(b, −s) 

> a

}a∈A on pooled data S

> b′≤b

S  

> s′̸=s

I(b′) 

> s′

using a nonparametric regressor satisfying Assumption D.1 or Assumption 1;  

> 9

Fit ˆ m(b, −s) 

> a

(x) (second-moment proxy) on the same pooled data;  

> 10

end 

// Compute next-batch design by plug-in optimization  

> 11

e(b+1) ← arg min 

> e∈E , e a(x)≥ε

En

"X

> a∈A

ˆm(b, −s) 

> a

(X)

ea(X)

#

;; // Scalar-target closed form: e(b+1)  

> a

(x) ∝ max {ε, 

q

ˆm(b, −s) 

> a

(x)}, renormalized  

> 12

end  

> 13

for s = 1 , . . . , S do  

> 14

Compute ˆθ(s) = En

h

ˆg(−s)(X) + P 

> a
> 1{A=a}
> e(b(i),−s)(A|X)

ˆv(−s) 

> a

(X, Y )

i

over fold s, using the realized logging propensity;  

> 15

end  

> 16

return ˆθn = 1

> S

PSs=1 ˆθ(s);

Design update. In the design-update step, we minimize the plug-in design objective over the feasible class E subject to the floor ea(x) ≥ ε. For the scalar-target case this reduces to the closed-form generalized Neyman allocation 

e(b, −s) 

> a

(x) ∝ max 



ε, 

q

ˆm(b, −s) 

> a

(x)



,

renormalized so that P 

> a

e(b, −s) 

> a

(x) = 1. For vector targets the optimization is convex and solvable by standard interior-point or projected-gradient methods. 

Nuisance estimation. The fits ˆ g(b, −s) and ˆ v(b, −s) 

> a

use the analyst’s preferred nonparametric regres-sion method (e.g., cross-validated series, random forest, or neural network). The only requirement is the rate condition in Assumption D.1 or Assumption 1, as appropriate. 

Final estimator. The realized logging propensity e(b(i),−s)(Xi) is known by construction, so no propensity estimation is required. The final estimator is the simple average of the S fold-specific cross-fitted EIF estimators. Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 35 

A.2 Batched Adaptive Covariate Balancing 

Algorithm 2 implements the covariate-balancing route. Compared to Algorithm 1, assignment within each batch is no longer i.i.d. draws from e(b); instead, a two-layer design (spatial binning plus within-bin grouped permutation) enforces near-exact local balance at the target propensity. The between-batch design updates are identical in form to Algorithm 1, but the inner estimator is a method-of-moments estimator based on the balance condition rather than a plug-in EIF estimator. 

Algorithm 2: Batched Adaptive Covariate Balancing 

Input: Sample size n; batch count B ≍ log n and sizes {γb}Bb=1 ; spatial bin diameter h = hn;tuple capacity G = Gn; propensity floor ε > 0; feasible class E; moment function 

m(X, A, Y, θ ). 

Output: Estimator ˆθn solving 1

> n

P 

> i

m(Xi, A i, Y i, ˆθn) = 0.  

> 1

Partition the covariate space X into bins {B ℓ}Mn 

> ℓ=1

of maximum diameter h, with Mn ≍ h−d; 

> 2

For each bin Bℓ, fix a reference point xℓ ∈ B ℓ; 

> 3

Initialize e(1) ∈ E with e(1)  

> a

(x) ≥ ε; 

> 4

for b = 1 , . . . , B do  

> 5

foreach bin Bℓ do  

> 6

Open an empty tuple buffer Tℓ of capacity G; 

> 7

end  

> 8

for each incoming unit i in batch b do  

> 9

Locate its bin ℓ(i) such that Xi ∈ B ℓ(i); 

> 10

Append i to Tℓ(i); 

> 11

if |T ℓ(i)| = G then 

// Randomized rounding: choose a count vector  

> 12

Let η(b) 

> ℓ

:= e(b)(xℓ(i)) ∈ ∆( A);  

> 13

Draw L ∈ ZK 

> +

with P 

> a

La = G and E[L] = Gη (b) 

> ℓ

via La = ⌊Gη (b)

> ℓ,a

⌋ + 1{a ∈ S},where |S| = G − P

> a

⌊Gη (b)

> ℓ,a

⌋ and P(a ∈ S) equals the fractional part of Gη (b)

> ℓ,a

;

// Uniform permutation within the tuple  

> 14

Form the multiset containing La copies of arm a; assign the G positions of Tℓ(i)

by a uniform random permutation of this multiset;  

> 15

Record outcomes {Yj }j∈T ℓ(i) ; close tuple;  

> 16

end  

> 17

end 

// End of batch: handle tail tuples with the same rounding+permutation scheme  

> 18

foreach non-empty tail tuple do  

> 19

Apply randomized rounding to η(b) 

> ℓ

scaled to the realized tuple length ℓ < G and assign by uniform permutation;  

> 20

end 

// Update design  

> 21

Fit second-moment proxy ˆ m(b) 

> a

on pooled data from batches ≤ b; 

> 22

e(b+1) ← arg min 

> e∈E , e a(x)≥ε

En

"X

> a∈A

ˆm(b) 

> a

(X)

ea(X)

#

; 

> 23

end  

> 24

return ˆθn solving 1

> n

Pni=1 m(Xi, A i, Y i, ˆθn) = 0; 

Batch schedule. As in Algorithm 1, we use geometric batches with B ≍ log n and γb ≍ nb/B .36 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Spatial bins. The bin partition {B ℓ} is fixed once and reused across all batches; only the within-bin target propensity η(b) 

> ℓ

= e(b)(xℓ) changes with b. Treating every unit falling in Bℓ as having the same target propensity e(b)(xℓ) introduces an O(h) Lipschitz approximation error that is controlled in Appendix G.4. 

Grouped permutation and rounding. Because G · e(b) 

> a

(xℓ) is generally non-integer, the rounding step draws a count vector L ∈ ZK 

> +

with P 

> a

La = G and E[L | F r−1] = G · e(b)(xℓ). The rounding variance is absorbed into the term (II) of the tuple-variance decomposition (Proposition 10). 

Handling tail tuples. At the end of each batch, each bin may have an incomplete (“tail”) tuple of length ℓ < G . Tail-tuple assignments also use uniform permutation with count vector drawn from the rounding scheme; their contribution to the balancing remainder is bounded by the MnG/n 

term in Theorem 6. 

Design update. The update of e(b) is identical in form to that of Algorithm 1: minimize the plug-in 

P 

> a

ˆm(b) 

> a

(x)/e a(x) objective subject to the propensity floor. In the scalar-target case this reduces to the closed-form generalized Neyman allocation e(b+1)  

> a

(x) ∝ max {ε, 

q

ˆm(b) 

> a

(x)} after renormalization. 

Tuning. Theorem 6 suggests the tuning h ≍ n−1/(d+4) and G ≍ n2/(d+4) , which balances the three error sources in (82) and is used throughout the analysis. Within a batch of size γb, the same tuning is applied with γb in place of n.

Final estimator. Since the assignment mechanism is known by construction, no propensity estimation is required for the final estimator. The method-of-moments estimator ˆθn solving 

> 1
> n

P 

> i

m(Xi, A i, Y i, ˆθn) = 0 does not use any nuisance fit; nuisance estimation enters only through the design-update step. 

B. Efficient Influence Functions for the Canonical Examples 

This appendix derives, from first principles, the efficient influence function (EIF) in the fixed i.i.d. benchmark model for each of the three canonical estimands considered in the main text: the average treatment effect (ATE), the quantile treatment effect (QTE), and the policy value. Each derivation follows the same template: (i) state the identifying moment condition, (ii) compute the pathwise derivative of θ along a regular one-dimensional submodel, (iii) identify the unique Riesz representer in the observed-data tangent space T (e) characterized in Appendix E.1, and (iv) specialize the resulting semiparametric efficiency bound V (¯ e)/n to the example. Together these three derivations show that the general EIF structure theorem reduces, in each concrete case, to a closed-form influence function whose second moment is the oracle variance used throughout Section 4 and Section 5. Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 37 

B.1 Setup and general EIF template 

Recall from Section 2 that the observed data are O = ( X, A, Y ) with A | X ∼ e(· | X) and Y |

(X, A = a) ∼ PY |X,a . The tangent space decomposition established in Appendix E.1 gives 

T (e) = TX ⊕ M

> a∈A

Ta,

and any pathwise-differentiable scalar parameter θ(P ) admits a unique EIF of the form 

φe(O) =  g(X) − θ(P0) + X

> a∈A

1{A = a}

e(a | X) va(X, Y ), E[va | X, A = a] = 0 , (28) with efficiency bound V (e) = E[φe(O)2] = Var (g(X)) + P 

> a

E[σ2

> a

(X)/e (a | X)] when va(X, Y ) = 

Y − E[Y | X, A = a]. The four subsections that follow specialize (28) by identifying the scalar g(·) and the arm-specific residuals va(·, ·) for each example. 

B.2 Average Treatment Effect (ATE) 

Estimand. With μa(X) := E[Y | X, A = a], the ATE is the linear functional 

θ(P ) = EP [μ1(X) − μ0(X)] .

Pathwise derivative. Fix a regular one-dimensional submodel Pt with score S(O) = SX (X) + 

P 

> a

1{A = a}Sa(X, Y ). Differentiating θ(Pt) = R [μ1,t (x) − μ0,t (x)] pX,t (x) dx at t = 0 and applying the product rule, ˙θP0 (S) = 

Z

[μ1(x) − μ0(x)] ˙ pX (x) dx + X

> a

Z

˙μa(x) · (−1) 1−a pX (x) dx. (29) For the first term, ˙ pX /p X = SX and E[SX (X)] = 0 allow us to subtract θ:

Z

[μ1 − μ0] ˙ pX dx = E  μ1(X) − μ0(X) − θSX (X) .

For each arm a, ˙ μa(x) = E[( Y − μa(x)) Sa(x, Y ) | X = x, A = a] since E[Sa | X, A = a] = 0. Converting back to an observed-data expectation by inserting the propensity-reweighting kernel 1{A = a}/e (a |

X), Z

˙μa(x)pX (x) dx = E

 1{A = a}

e(a | X)

 Y − μa(X)Sa(X, Y )



. (30) 

EIF. Substituting (30) into (29) and matching ˙θP0 (S) = E[φe(O)S(O)] termwise yields 

φe(O) =  μ1(X) − μ0(X) − θ + 1{A = 1 }

e(1 | X)

 Y − μ1(X) − 1{A = 0 }

e(0 | X)

 Y − μ0(X). (31) This matches the template (28) with g(X) = μ1(X) − μ0(X), v1(X, Y ) = Y − μ1(X), and v0(X, Y ) = 

−(Y − μ0(X)), both satisfying the orthogonality E[va | X, A = a] = 0. 38 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Efficiency bound. Since the cross terms between the X-piece and the IPW pieces vanish (by E[va |

X, A = a] = 0) and the two arm-IPW pieces are mutually orthogonal ( 1{A = 1 }1{A = 0 } ≡ 0), 

VATE (e) = Var  μ1(X) − μ0(X) + E

 σ21 (X)

e(1 | X)



+ E

 σ20 (X)

e(0 | X)



, (32) which is the standard semiparametric efficiency bound for the ATE under known propensities 

e(· | X). 

B.3 Quantile Treatment Effect (QTE) 

Estimand. Fix a quantile level τ ∈ (0 , 1). For a ∈ { 0, 1}, let FY (a) denote the marginal CDF of Y (a)and qa := qa(τ ) the τ -quantile, defined implicitly by FY (a)(qa) = τ . The QTE is 

θ(P ) = q1(τ ) − q0(τ ).

Throughout this subsection we assume that Y (a) admits a continuous marginal density fY (a) with 

fY (a)(qa) > 0, the standard regularity for pathwise differentiability of quantile functionals. 

Pathwise derivative via implicit differentiation. Differentiating the identity FY (a),t (qa,t ) = τ at t = 0 gives ˙qa(S) = − ˙FY (a)(qa)

fY (a)(qa) , (33) so it suffices to compute ˙FY (a)(qa). Under no unmeasured confounding, FY (a)|X (y | x) = FY |X,A =a(y |

x), and 

FY (a)(qa) = EFY |X,A =a(qa | X) .

Differentiating along the submodel and applying the same product-rule decomposition as in B.2, ˙FY (a)(qa) = E  FY |X,A =a(qa | X) − τ  SX (X)

+ E

 1{A = a}

e(a | X)

 1{Y ≤ qa} − FY |X,A =a(qa | X)Sa(X, Y )



, (34) using E[FY |X,A =a(qa | X)] = τ to recenter the X-piece. 

EIF for the quantile qa. Combining (33) and (34) and reading off ˙ qa(S) = E[φqa(O)S(O)], 

φqa(O) = − FY |X,A =a(qa | X) − τfY (a)(qa) − 1{A = a}

e(a | X) · 1{Y ≤ qa} − FY |X,A =a(qa | X)

fY (a)(qa) . (35) This matches the template with ga(X) = qa − FY |X,A =a(qa|X)−τfY (a)(qa) (so E[ga(X)] = qa) and arm-specific residual 

vqa(X, Y ) = − 1{Y ≤ qa} − FY |X,A =a(qa | X)

fY (a)(qa) , E[vqa | X, A = a] = 0 .

EIF for the QTE and efficiency bound. By linearity of pathwise differentiation, θ = q1 − q0 has EIF 

φQTE  

> e

(O) = φq

> 1

(O) − φq

> 0

(O). (36) Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 39 

The IPW pieces in arms 0 and 1 are mutually orthogonal ( 1{A = 1 }1{A = 0 } ≡ 0), and the cross terms between any X-piece and any IPW piece vanish by E[vqa | X, A = a] = 0. Writing Ga(X) := 

FY |X,A =a(qa | X) for brevity, 

VQTE (e) = Var 

 G1(X)

fY (1) (q1) − G0(X)

fY (0) (q0)



+ X

> a∈{ 0,1}

E

" Ga(X) 1 − Ga(X)

e(a | X) fY (a)(qa)2

#

, (37) where we used Var (1{Y ≤ qa} | X, A = a) = Ga(X)(1 − Ga(X)). 

B.4 Policy Value 

Estimand. Fix a policy π : X → ∆( A) that is known and does not depend on the unknown distri-bution P . The policy value is the linear functional 

θ(P ) = EP

"X

> a∈A

πa(X)μa(X)

#

.

Because π is fixed, θ is linear in the conditional-mean nuisance μ = ( μa)a∈A .

Pathwise derivative. Writing θ(Pt) = R P  

> a

πa(x)μa,t (x) pX,t (x) dx and differentiating at t = 0, ˙θP0 (S) = E

"X 

> a

πa(X)μa(X) − θ



SX (X)

#

+ X

> a

Z

πa(x) ˙ μa(x) pX (x) dx, 

where the recentering by θ uses E[SX ] = 0. Applying the same identity ˙ μa(x) = E[( Y − μa)Sa | X =

x, A = a] as in B.2 and converting to an observed-data expectation, 

X

> a

Z

πa(x) ˙ μa(x) pX (x) dx = X

> a

E

 πa(X)1{A = a}

e(a | X)

 Y − μa(X)Sa(X, Y )



.

EIF. Matching ˙θP0 (S) = E[φe(O)S(O)] termwise, 

φe(O) = 

X 

> a

πa(X)μa(X) − θ



+ X

> a

πa(X)1{A = a}

e(a | X)

 Y − μa(X). (38) This is the template (28) with g(X) = P 

> a

πa(X)μa(X) and va(X, Y ) = πa(X)( Y − μa(X)), which inherits the orthogonality E[va | X, A = a] = 0 from E[Y − μa | X, A = a] = 0. 

Efficiency bound. The same orthogonality argument as in B.2 yields 

Vpolicy (e) = Var X

> a

πa(X)μa(X)

!

+ X

> a

E

 πa(X)2σ2

> a

(X)

e(a | X)



. (39) 

Remark (linear-functional case). Because θ is linear in μ, Proposition 2 applies, so the cross-term in the excess-MSE decomposition vanishes exactly under cross-fitting; this is the linear-functional sharpness regime analyzed in Section 4. 40 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

C. Covariate-Balancing Moment Functions for the Canonical Examples 

This appendix makes explicit, for each of the three canonical estimands considered in the main text, the three objects that drive the covariate-balancing analysis of Section 5: (i) the moment function m(X, A, Y, θ ), (ii) the induced balance function ωa(X) = −M −1 E[m(X, a, Y, θ 0) | X], and (iii) the second-moment proxy ma(X) = E[ ∥m(X, a, Y, θ 0)∥2 | X] that appears in the generalized Neyman allocation. Together these determine both the feasibility check of Theorem 7 (Lipschitz balance functions) and the closed-form design update inside Algorithm 2. 

C.1 The moment-and-balance-function framework 

We work throughout with scalar or low-dimensional estimands θ ∈ Rq identified by a moment condition 

E[m(X, A, Y, θ 0)] = 0 , M := ∂∂θ E[m(X, A, Y, θ )] θ=θ0

invertible .

The balance function associated with arm a is defined by 

ωa(X) := −M −1 E[m(X, a, Y, θ 0) | X], (40) and the second-moment proxy is ma(X) := E[ ∥m(X, a, Y, θ 0)∥2   

> M−⊤ M−1

| X], which reduces to the conditional variance σ2

> a

(X) in the scalar case. The generalized Neyman allocation solves 

e⋆a(x) ∝ pma(x), X

> a

e⋆a(x) = 1 ,

up to the propensity floor. For each example below, we give the moment function, compute ωa

explicitly from (40), and record ma.

C.2 Average Treatment Effect (ATE) 

Take m(X, A, Y, θ ) = Y · 1{A = 1 } − 1{A = 0 }

eA(X) − θ. Then M = −1 and 

ωa(X) = ( −1) 1−a μa(X), a ∈ { 0, 1},

which is Lipschitz whenever μa is. The second-moment proxy is ma(X) = σ2

> a

(X), giving the familiar Neyman allocation e⋆a(x) ∝ σa(x). 

C.3 Quantile Treatment Effect (QTE) 

For θ = q1(τ ) − q0(τ ), the moment equation uses ma(Y, θ a) = 1{Y ≤ θa} − τ on each arm, and the balance function is 

ωa(X) = FY (a)|X (qa(τ )) − τfa(qa(τ )) ,Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 41 

which is Lipschitz under smoothness of the conditional CDF. Writing Ga(X) := FY (a)|X (qa(τ ) | X)for the conditional CDF evaluated at the marginal τ -quantile, the second-moment proxy is 

ma(X) = Ga(X) 1 − Ga(X)

fa(qa(τ )) 2 ,

which matches the conditional variance of the indicator residual vqa(X, Y ) in the EIF derivation (35) (Appendix B.3). 

C.4 Policy Value 

For a fixed policy π : X → ∆( A), θ = E[P 

> a

πa(X)μa(X)]. The nuisance is η = ( μa)a∈A with pseudo-metric d(η, η 0)2 = P 

> a

E[(ˆ μa(X) − μa(X)) 2], and 

ωa(X) = πa(X) μa(X), ma(X) = πa(X)2 σ2

> a

(X),

which is Lipschitz when both πa and μa are. Exact global unbiasedness (Proposition 2) applies. In every case, Theorem 7 applies with the corresponding ( m, ω a, m a) triple, so the batched adaptive balancing design achieves the V ⋆/n efficiency benchmark. 

D. Regularity Conditions Used in Sections 4–5 

This appendix collects the formal regularity conditions invoked in the regression-adjustment anal-ysis of Section 4 and the covariate-balancing analysis of Section 5. The body text records only the structural orthogonality and rate hypotheses; the auxiliary boundedness, positivity, and second-order remainder conditions are gathered here. 

D.1 General EIF regularity (Section 4.3) 

Assumption (General EIF regularity) . We assume the following regularity conditions: (i) Positivity and boundedness: The assignment propensities satisfy e(b) 

> a

(x) ≥ ε > 0, and the conditional second moments ma(x) are uniformly bounded almost surely. (ii) Neyman orthogonality: The pathwise derivative of the expected EIF score vanishes at the true nuisance parameter η0.(iii) Second-order remainder: The bias and variance of the EIF score vary at most quadrati-cally with nuisance error: 

E[ψ(η) − ψ(η0)] ≲ d(η, η 0)2, (41) 

E(ψ(η) − ψ(η0)) 2 ≲ d(η, η 0)2. (42) 42 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

E. Proofs for Sections 2–3 (EIF Structure and Lower Bounds) 

E.1 Proof of the EIF structure under known assignment 

Strategy. The argument has three steps. First, we exploit the known assignment mechanism to decompose the tangent space at P0 into an orthogonal sum of a covariate component and arm-specific components. Second, a Riesz representation argument on each orthogonal component iso-lates a unique representer. Third, we show that the arm-specific representer must carry the char-acteristic 1 /e (a | X) inverse-weighting factor, which combined with the uniqueness of the covariate piece yields the asserted EIF form (2). 

Proof of Lemma 1. Let L02(P0) be the Hilbert space of square-integrable, mean-zero functions under P0 with inner product ⟨f, g ⟩ := E0[f (O)g(O)]. Because e is fixed, any regular one-dimensional submodel t 7 → Pt through P0 can perturb only pX and each pa(· | x) (but not e). Therefore the score 

S(O) := ddt log pt(O) t=0 must admit the decomposition 

S(O) = SX (X) + X

> a∈A

1{A = a} Sa(X, Y ), E0[SX (X)] = 0 , E0[Sa(X, Y ) | X, A = a] = 0 . (43) Define the linear subspaces 

TX := {h(X) : E0[h(X)] = 0 }, Ta := {1{A = a}sa(X, Y ) : E0[sa(X, Y ) | X, A = a] = 0 }.

Then the (closed) tangent space at P0 is the orthogonal direct sum 

T (e) = TX ⊕ M

> a∈A

Ta.

Orthogonality holds because for any h ∈ T X and 1{A = a}sa ∈ T a,

E0

h(X)1{A = a}sa(X, Y ) = E0

h

h(X)E0[1{A = a}sa(X, Y ) | X]

i

= E0

h

h(X)e(a | X) E0[sa(X, Y ) | X, A = a]

| {z }

> 0

i

= 0 ,

and for a̸ = b, 1{A = a}1{A = b} ≡ 0 implies Ta ⊥ T b.

Step 2: Riesz representation on each orthogonal component. Pathwise differentiability of 

θ implies that the derivative map S 7 → ˙θP0 (S) ∈ R is a continuous linear functional on the Hilbert space T (e). Hence, by the Riesz representation theorem, there exists a unique φe ∈ T (e) ⊂ L02(P0)such that ˙θP0 (S) = E0

φe(O) S(O), ∀S ∈ T (e). (44) Because T (e) is an orthogonal direct sum, any φe ∈ T (e) decomposes uniquely as 

φe(O) = φX (X) + X

> a∈A

φa(O), φX ∈ T X , φ a ∈ T a. (45) The TX -component has the form φX (X) = g(X) − θ(P0) for some measurable g with E0[g(X)] = 

θ(P0). Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 43 

Step 3: Identification of the arm-specific representer and the 1/e factor. Fix an arm a ∈ A 

and consider scores of the form S(O) = 1{A = a}sa(X, Y ) ∈ T a. By (44) and (45), the restriction of ˙θP0 to Ta is represented by φa via ˙θP0 (1{A = a}sa) = E0

φa(O) 1{A = a}sa(X, Y ) ∀sa : E0[sa | X, A = a] = 0 . (46) We now show that any such representer must be of the form φa(O) = 1{A=a} 

> e(a|X)

va(X, Y ) with E0[va |

X, A = a] = 0. Indeed, for any admissible sa,

E0

 1{A = a}

e(a | X) va(X, Y )



(1{A = a}sa(X, Y )) 



= E0

 1{A = a}

e(a | X) va(X, Y )sa(X, Y )



= E0



E0

 1{A = a}

e(a | X) va(X, Y )sa(X, Y ) X

 

= E0

 1

e(a | X) P(A = a | X) E0[va(X, Y )sa(X, Y ) | X, A = a]



= E0

h

E0

va(X, Y )sa(X, Y ) | X, A = ai

. (47) Finally, uniqueness of va follows from (47): if 1{A=a} 

> e(a|X)

va and 1{A=a} 

> e(a|X)

˜va induce the same functional on Ta, then for all admissible sa,0 = E0

h

E0

(va − ˜va)sa | X, A = ai

.

Choosing sa = va − ˜va yields 0 = E0

h

E0

(va − ˜va)2 | X, A = ai

,

hence va = ˜ va a.s. on {A = a}. Combining the unique TX and arm-specific components yields (2). 

■

E.2 Proofs for the average-propensity lower bound 

Strategy. We construct a least-favorable one-dimensional submodel whose score coincides (up to a normalization constant) with the scalar EIF under the average-propensity model. Because the design rule is not perturbed along this submodel, the trajectory log-likelihood ratio decomposes into a martingale sum of observation-level scores. An average-propensity identity then reduces the variance of this sum to the observation-level EIF variance, so Cauchy–Schwarz produces the desired lower bound. 

Lemma 2 (Tilting-score identity) . Let ϕ = φ¯e be the scalar EIF under the average-propensity model with variance V = E[ϕ(O)2]. There exists a regular one-dimensional submodel {Pε}ε through 

P0, consisting of exponential tiltings of the covariate marginal and each outcome conditional, whose score at ε = 0 equals s(O) = ϕ(O)/V .44 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Proof of Lemma 2. Write the scalar EIF in the decomposition induced by (2): 

ϕ(O) =  g(X) − θ(P0) +

> K

X

> a=1

1{A = a}

¯ea(X) va(X, Y ), E[va(X, Y ) | X, A = a] = 0 ,

for some g with E[g(X)] = θ(P0). Define a one-dimensional submodel Pε by exponential tilting of the marginal and conditionals: 

dP X,ε 

dP X, 0

(x) ∝ exp 



ε g(x) − θ(P0)

V



, (48) 

dP Y |X,A =a,ε 

dP Y |X,A =a, 0

(y | x) ∝ exp 



ε va(x, y )

V ¯ea(x)



, a ∈ A . (49) Under dominated/QMD regularity, the score at ε = 0 is exactly s(O) = ϕ(O)/V .

Proof of Theorem 1. Let P ALG  

> ε

denote the trajectory law of ( O1, . . . , O n) under Pε and design 

ALG . Define 

Z(Fn) := ddε log dP ALG 

> ε

dP ALG 

> 0

(Fn) ε=0 

.

Because the design rule is not perturbed by ε,

Z(Fn) = 

> n

X

> t=1

s(Ot).

Also {s(Ot)}nt=1 is a martingale difference sequence under {F t}:

E[s(Ot) | F t−1] = 0 .

For any integrable test function va(X, Y ), we use the average-propensity identity 1

n

> n

X

> t=1

E

 1{At = a}

¯ea(Xt)2 va(Xt, Y t)



= E

 1¯ea(X) E[va(X, Y ) | X, A = a]



, (50) which follows from conditioning on ( Ft−1, X t), then averaging in t and applying (1). Let T = T (Fn) be locally unbiased along this submodel: 

ddε EALG  

> ε

[T ] ε=0 

= ddε θ(Pε) ε=0 

.

By score identity and EIF normalization, 

E[Z(Fn) T ] = 1 .

Hence by Cauchy–Schwarz, 

Var (T ) ≥ 1

E[Z(Fn)2] .

Using the martingale-difference decomposition, 

E[Z(Fn)2] = 

> n

X

> t=1

E[s(Ot)2] = n E[s(O)2] = n

E[φ¯e(O)2] ,Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 45 

where the last step uses s = ϕ/V and identity (50). Therefore 

Var (T ) ≥ 1

n Eφ¯e(O)2 .

In particular, (50) is used with test functions built from the EIF components (e.g., va(X, Y )2) when evaluating E[φ¯e(O)2] under the structural form (2). 

E.3 Resolving the two-stage local randomization conjecture of Cytrynbaum (2021) 

Strategy. Cytrynbaum (2021) conjectured that in two-stage locally randomized experimental designs, the semiparametric efficiency benchmark remains characterized by a fixed i.i.d. benchmark evaluated at the induced average effective propensity scores , with an explicit additive decomposition in the stagewise-factorization case. The main-text result of Section 3 resolves a scalar version of this conjecture via the average-propensity argument in Appendix E.2. Here we extend that argument to the two-stage setting in full generality, proving (i) the base-model analogue of Theorem 1 in which both stages of the experiment use a common design summary ψ, and (ii) the factorization extension in which sampling and assignment use different stage-wise summaries ( ψ1, ψ 2) and the benchmark factorizes into independent stage-1 sampling and stage-2 assignment propensities. The proof strat-egy mirrors Appendix E.2: compute the EIF in the corresponding fixed benchmark model, then bound any locally unbiased estimator’s variance from below by the benchmark’s inverse Fisher information evaluated at the induced average effective propensity scores. Throughout, the target parameter is the population average treatment effect 

θ(P0) := EP0 [Y (1) − Y (0)] .

E.3.1 Common setup and notation Let 

Wt = ( Xt, Y t(0) , Y t(1)) , t = 1 , . . . , n, 

be latent full data with W1, . . . , W ni.i.d. 

∼ P0. Write 

μa(x) := E[Y (a) | X = x], σ2

> a

(x) := Var (Y (a) | X = x), a ∈ { 0, 1},

and c(x) := μ1(x) − μ0(x). For each unit, the final observed state is At ∈ { ∅, 0, 1}, where At = ∅ if unit t is not sampled, and At ∈ { 0, 1} indicates sampling with the corresponding assignment. The observed outcome is 

Y obs  

> t

:= 1{At̸ = ∅} 1{At = 1 }Yt(1) + 1{At = 0 }Yt(0) .

Outcome visibility. For the lower-bound argument, the only substantive design regularity needed is that, conditional on ( Xt, A t), the law of the observed outcome coincides with the corresponding potential-outcome law and does not depend on the design history: 

L(Y obs  

> t

| Xt, A t = a, Ft−1) = L(Yt(a) | Xt), a ∈ { 0, 1}.46 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

E.3.2 A serializable filtration for local randomization The local-randomization proce-dures in the survey-experiment literature are defined offline: one first forms groups using visible design variables and exogenous randomness, and then draws exactly a out of k units (or a′ out of 

k′ units) inside each group. For the efficiency argument, it is convenient to work with a serialized representation of this offline procedure. 

Assumption 2 (Serializable non-anticipating representation) . There exists an ordering of units t = 1 , . . . , n and a filtration (Ft)nt=0 such that: 

1. for each t, Ft−1 contains all design-visible information revealed strictly before the final state of unit t is resolved; 

2. conditional on (Xt, Ft−1), the final observed state of unit t has a measurable kernel 

ρt(a | Xt, Ft−1) := P(At = a | Xt, Ft−1), a ∈ { ∅, 0, 1};3. the kernel ρt depends only on the stagewise visible covariates and the past design history, never on unrevealed outcomes or on the potential outcomes of unit t;

4. conditional on (Xt, A t), the observed outcome law satisfies the outcome-visibility condition above. Why this is natural for local randomization. After the offline groups are formed from the visible design variables and exogenous grouping randomness, one may fix an arbitrary order of groups and an arbitrary order of units within each group. Conditional on the realized grouping, exact a-out-of-k

randomization inside a group has the standard without-replacement sequential representation 

P(Ug,r = 1 | H g,r −1) = a − Ng,r −1

|g| − r + 1 ,

where Ng,r −1 is the number of previously selected units in group g. The same applies to the assignment stage. Any such serialization yields Assumption 2. This is the information order used below. 

E.3.3 Average effective propensity scores For a ∈ { 0, 1} define the average effective observed-arm masses 

¯πa(x) := 1

n

> n

X

> t=1

Eρt(a | x, Ft−1). (51) These are the two-stage analogues of the induced average propensity scores of Appendix E.2 and are the primitive design objects for the lower bound. When convenient, define also ¯q(x) := ¯ π1(x) + ¯ π0(x), ¯p(x) := ¯π1(x)¯π1(x) + ¯ π0(x) on {¯q(x) > 0}. (52) In the extension, the factorization case is precisely the case in which ¯ q depends only on the stage-1 information and ¯ p depends only on the stage-2 information. Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 47 

Lemma 3 (Two-stage APS identities) . Suppose Assumption 2 holds and let 

ma(x) := E[ha(x, Y (a)) | X = x], a ∈ { 0, 1},

for any integrable measurable functions h1, h 0. Then 

1

n

> n

X

> t=1

E

 1{At = 1 }

¯π1(Xt)2 h1(Xt, Y obs  

> t

)



= E

 m1(X)¯π1(X)



, (53) 

and the analogous identity holds for a = 0 . Moreover, with ¯q = ¯ π1 + ¯ π0,

1

n

> n

X

> t=1

E

 1{At̸ = ∅}

¯q(Xt)2 g(Xt)



= E

 g(X)¯q(X)



(54) 

for every integrable measurable g.

Proof of Lemma 3. We prove (53); the a = 0 and ¯ q identities are identical. By iterated expecta-tions and the definition of ρt,

E1{At = 1 }h1(Xt, Y obs  

> t

) Xt, Ft−1

 = ρt(1 | Xt, Ft−1) m1(Xt),

because the conditional law of the observed outcome on {At = 1 } is exactly the law of Yt(1) given 

Xt. Therefore 

E

 1{At = 1 }

¯π1(Xt)2 h1(Xt, Y obs  

> t

)



= E

 ρt(1 | Xt, Ft−1)¯π1(Xt)2 m1(Xt)



.

Averaging over t and using the definition (51) of ¯ π1 gives (53). ■

E.3.4 Setting I: the base model In the base model there is a single design summary Lt := 

ψ(Xt) visible for all eligible units from the outset. Sampling uses Lt, and assignment also uses Lt.

Concrete experiment and filtration. A locally randomized design with fixed target propensities 

q(ψ) and p(ψ) proceeds in two stages: (i) partition eligible units into q-strata and groups using 

{ψ(Xi)} and exogenous randomness, and draw exactly the required number of sampled units; (ii) on the sampled units, form p-strata and assignment groups using {ψ(Xi)} and a second exogenous seed, and draw exactly the required number of treated units. Fix any serialization of this offline grouped randomization as in Assumption 2; let ( Ft) and ρt be the resulting filtration and final-state kernel. 

APS in the base model. The primitive APS objects are (¯ π1, ¯π0) from (51). If the average bench-mark factorizes through q and p, then ¯ π1(x) = ¯ q(ψ(x))¯ p(ψ(x)) and ¯ π0(x) = ¯ q(ψ(x)) {1 − ¯p(ψ(x)) }.48 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Fixed benchmark model. The benchmark observation is O = ( X, A, Y A) with A ∈ { ∅, 0, 1} gener-ated by 

P(A = 1 | X = x) = ¯ π1(x), P(A = 0 | X = x) = ¯ π0(x), P(A = ∅ | X = x) = 1 − ¯π1(x) − ¯π0(x),

and, on {A = a}, Y A has the law of Y (a) given X.

Proposition 4 (EIF in the base benchmark) . In the base benchmark model, the efficient influence function for the ATE is 

ϕbase ,¯π (O) = c(X) − θ + 1{A = 1 }

¯π1(X) {Y A − μ1(X)} − 1{A = 0 }

¯π0(X) {Y A − μ0(X)}. (55) 

Its variance is 

Vbase (¯ π) = Var (c(X)) + E

 σ21 (X)¯π1(X) + σ20 (X)¯π0(X)



. (56) 

Proof of Proposition 4. Define the full-data bridge 

Hbase ,¯π (W ) := c(X) − θ + Y (1) − μ1(X)¯π1(X) − Y (0) − μ0(X)¯π0(X) .

Conditioning on the observed state A gives E[Hbase ,¯π (W ) | O] = ϕbase ,¯π (O), which is exactly (55). Hence ϕbase ,¯π is the observed-data projection of the full-data gradient, therefore the EIF. Since the residual terms have conditional mean zero given X and the two arm indicators are disjoint, 

E[ϕbase ,¯π (O)2] = Var (c(X)) + E

 σ21 (X)¯π1(X)



+ E

 σ20 (X)¯π0(X)



,

which is (56). ■

Theorem 8 (APS lower bound in the base model) . Assume Assumption 2 and positivity 

¯πa(x) ≥ ε > 0 for a ∈ { 0, 1}. Let ˆθn be any estimator that is locally unbiased along the least-favorable one-dimensional submodel associated with the fixed benchmark under ¯π. Then 

Var P0,ALG (ˆθn) ≥ 1

n Vbase (¯ π). (57) 

Proof of Theorem 8. Let V := Vbase (¯ π) and H(W ) := Hbase ,¯π (W ). By Proposition 4, E[H(W ) |

O] = ϕbase ,¯π (O) and E[( Y (1) −Y (0) −θ)H(W )] = V . The one-dimensional exponential-tilt submodel 

dP ε

dP 0

(W ) = exp {εH (W )/V }

E[exp {εH (W )/V }]has score H(W )/V at ε = 0 and parameter derivative ddε θ(Pε)|ε=0 = 1. Now keep the design fixed and perturb only the latent law from P0 to Pε. For unit t, the observed score contribution is 

st := E

 H(Wt)

V Ot, Ft−1



= 1

V ϕbase ,¯π (Ot),Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 49 

because H(Wt) depends only on unit t. By local unbiasedness, 1 = ddε Eε[ˆθn] ε=0 

= E

"

(ˆθn − θ)

> n

X

> t=1

st

#

,

so Cauchy–Schwarz gives 1 ≤

q

E[( ˆθn − θ)2]pE[( P 

> t

st)2]. Decompose ϕbase ,¯π (Ot) = c(Xt) − θ + Rt with residual 

Rt = 1{At = 1 }

¯π1(Xt) (Y obs  

> t

− μ1(Xt)) − 1{At = 0 }

¯π0(Xt) (Y obs  

> t

− μ0(Xt)) .

Cross terms between distinct units vanish (latent independence and mean-zero residuals), so 

E[( P 

> t

st)2] = P 

> t

E[s2 

> t

]. Averaging and invoking Lemma 3 with ha(x, y ) = ( y − μa(x)) 2 gives 1

n

> n

X

> t=1

E[s2 

> t

] = 1

V 2



Var (c(X)) + E

 σ21 (X)¯π1(X)



+ E

 σ20 (X)¯π0(X)

 

= 1

V .

Hence E[( P 

> t

st)2] = n/V . Substituting yields E[( ˆθn − θ)2] ≥ V /n , which is (57). ■

Remark 2 (Normalization by the realized experiment size). If one normalizes by 

nT = P 

> t

1{At̸ = ∅} rather than n, then n/n T → 1/E[¯ q(ψ(X))] in the base model, so the same bound can be rewritten in the √nT normalization used in survey-experiment settings by multiplying the 

n-normalized variance by E[¯ q(ψ(X))]. 

E.3.5 Setting II: the extension under stagewise factorization We now allow different design summaries at the two stages: L1t := ψ1(Xt) and L2t := ψ2(Xt). The key feature is that L1t is visible at the sampling stage for every eligible unit, whereas L2t is only revealed if unit t is sampled. 

Concrete experiment and filtration. Stage 1 uses {ψ1(Xt)} and exogenous randomness to form sampling groups and execute exact local randomization. When unit t is sampled, its L2t is revealed. Stage 2 uses the revealed {L2t} among sampled units and a second exogenous seed to form assign-ment groups and execute exact local randomization. Fix any serialization of this procedure and let (Ft) be the resulting filtration. 

Stagewise benchmark factorization. For the extension we restrict attention to the factorization case, in which the induced benchmark factors through a stage-1 benchmark sampling propensity ¯ q

and a stage-2 benchmark assignment propensity ¯ p:¯π1(x) = ¯ q(ψ1(x)) ¯ p(ψ2(x)) , ¯π0(x) = ¯ q(ψ1(x)) {1 − ¯p(ψ2(x)) }. (58) This is exactly the case in which the averaged benchmark can still be interpreted as “first sample according to ¯ q(ψ1), then assign according to ¯ p(ψ2).” 50 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Fixed benchmark model. The fixed benchmark observation is O = ( L1, T, T L 2, T D, T Y ) where 

T | L1 ∼ Bernoulli(¯ q(L1)) , D | (T = 1 , L 2) ∼ Bernoulli(¯ p(L2)) , Y = T {DY (1) + (1 − D)Y (0) }.

Define 

νa(ℓ2) := E[Y (a) | L2 = ℓ2], c2(ℓ2) := ν1(ℓ2) − ν0(ℓ2), c1(ℓ1) := E[c(X) | L1 = ℓ1],

and 

b¯p(X) := μ1(X)

s

1 − ¯p(L2)¯p(L2) + μ0(X)

s

¯p(L2)1 − ¯p(L2) .

Proposition 5 (EIF in the extension benchmark) . In the factorized extension bench-mark, the efficient influence function for the ATE is 

ϕext ,¯q, ¯p(O) = c1(L1) − θ + T

¯q(L1)



c2(L2) − c1(L1) + D

¯p(L2) {Y − ν1(L2)} − 1 − D

1 − ¯p(L2) {Y − ν0(L2)}



.

(59) 

Proof of Proposition 5. Define the bridge 

Hext ,¯q, ¯p(W ) := c1(L1) − θ + c2(L2) − c1(L1)¯q(L1) + Y (1) − ν1(L2)¯q(L1)¯ p(L2) − Y (0) − ν0(L2)¯q(L1){1 − ¯p(L2)} .

Case analysis on the observed state yields E[Hext ,¯q, ¯p(W ) | O] = ϕext ,¯q, ¯p(O): on {T = 0 } only L1 is observed and the two bridge terms involving L2 collapse by iterated expectations; on {T = 1 , D = 1 }

we observe ( L1, L 2, Y (1)) and the bridge reduces to the corresponding terms of (59); the {T =1, D = 0 } case is analogous. Hence (59) is the observed-data projection of the full-data gradient, therefore the EIF. ■

Proposition 6 (Variance of the extension benchmark EIF) . The variance of the EIF in 

(59) equals Vext (¯ q, ¯p) = V1(¯ q, ¯p) + V2(¯ q, ¯p), where 

V1(¯ q, ¯p) = Var (c(X)) + E

 1¯q(L1)

 σ21 (X)¯p(L2) + σ20 (X)1 − ¯p(L2)

 

, (60) 

V2(¯ q, ¯p) = E

 1 − ¯q(L1)¯q(L1) Var (c(X) | L1)



+ E

 1¯q(L1) Var (b¯p(X) | L2)



. (61) 

Proof of Proposition 6. Write A := c1(L1) − θ, B := c2(L2) − c1(L1), R := D 

> ¯p(L2)

(Y − ν1(L2)) −  

> 1−D
> 1−¯p(L2)

(Y − ν0(L2)), so ϕext ,¯q, ¯p = A + T 

> ¯q(L1)

(B + R). Since E[B + R | L1] = 0, the cross term vanishes and 

E[ϕ2ext ,¯q, ¯p] = Var (c1(L1)) + E

 1¯q(L1) (B + R)2



.

Given ( L1, L 2), E[R | L2] = 0 so E[( B + R)2 | L1, L 2] = B2 + E[R2 | L2]; disjointness of the treated and control residuals gives E[R2 | L2] = Var (Y (1) | L2)/¯p(L2) + Var (Y (0) | L2)/(1 − ¯p(L2)). Applying Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 51 

the law of total variance Var (Y (a) | L2) = E[σ2

> a

(X) | L2] + Var (μa(X) | L2) and the algebraic identity 

Var (μ1(X) | L2)¯p(L2) + Var (μ0(X) | L2)1 − ¯p(L2) = Var (c(X) | L2) + Var (b¯p(X) | L2),

followed by the tower-property identities Var (c(X) | L1) = E[Var (c(X) | L2) | L1]+ Var (c2(L2) | L1)and Var (c(X)) = Var (c1(L1)) + E[Var (c(X) | L1)], yields exactly (60)–(61). ■

Theorem 9 (APS lower bound for the extension under factorization) . Assume Assumption 2, positivity of (¯ q, ¯p), and the factorization (58) . Let ˆθn be any estimator that is locally unbiased along the least-favorable one-dimensional submodel associated with the fixed extension benchmark (¯ q, ¯p). Then 

Var P0,ALG (ˆθn) ≥ 1

n {V1(¯ q, ¯p) + V2(¯ q, ¯p)}. (62) 

Proof of Theorem 9. Let V := Vext (¯ q, ¯p) = V1(¯ q, ¯p) + V2(¯ q, ¯p) and H(W ) := Hext ,¯q, ¯p(W ). By Propo-sitions 5–6, E[H(W ) | O] = ϕext ,¯q, ¯p(O) and E[( Y (1) − Y (0) − θ)H(W )] = V , so the exponential-tilt submodel has score H(W )/V and parameter derivative 1 at ε = 0. Keeping the design fixed and perturbing only the latent law, the score contribution of unit t is 

st = E

 H(Wt)

V Ot, Ft−1



= 1

V ϕext ,¯q, ¯p(Ot).

Indeed: on {At = ∅} we observe only L1t, and Tt does not depend on L2t given L1t, so E[c2(L2t) −

c1(L1t) | L1t, A t = ∅, Ft−1] = 0; on {At ∈ { 0, 1}} , the relevant stage-2 information is revealed and the bridge reduces exactly to the corresponding term in (59). By local unbiasedness, 1 = E[( ˆθn −

θ) P 

> t

st], so Cauchy–Schwarz gives 1 ≤

q

E[( ˆθn − θ)2]pE[( P 

> t

st)2]. Decompose ϕext ,¯q, ¯p(Ot) = c1(L1t) − θ + 1{At̸ =∅} 

> ¯q(L1t)

(c2(L2t) − c1(L1t)) + Rt with residual 

Rt = 1{At = 1 }

¯q(L1t)¯ p(L2t) (Y obs  

> t

− ν1(L2t)) − 1{At = 0 }

¯q(L1t){1 − ¯p(L2t)} (Y obs  

> t

− ν0(L2t)) .

Cross terms between different units vanish: the deterministic components are centered functions of independent latent units, the residual terms have conditional mean zero, and the sampling-augmentation term has conditional mean zero given L1t because E[c2(L2t) − c1(L1t) | L1t] = 0. Hence 

E[( P 

> t

st)2] = P 

> t

E[s2 

> t

]. Averaging and using Lemma 3 with (54) gives 1

n

> n

X

> t=1

E[s2 

> t

] = 1

V 2 {V1(¯ q, ¯p) + V2(¯ q, ¯p)} = 1

V ,

so E[( P 

> t

st)2] = n/V . Substituting into Cauchy–Schwarz yields E[( ˆθn − θ)2] ≥ V /n , which is (62). 

■52 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Remark 3 (Scope of the factorization theorem). Theorem 9 is stated only for the fac-torization benchmark (58). In complete generality, the primitive lower-bound object remains the pair of average effective masses (¯ π1, ¯π0) and the fixed benchmark is the corresponding observed-data semiparametric model. The factorization hypothesis is used only to identify that general benchmark with the closed-form expression V1(¯ q, ¯p) + V2(¯ q, ¯p). 

Remark 4 (Interpretation of V2). The two terms in V2 are projection losses induced by the two-stage information structure. The first is the loss from seeing only L1 at the sampling stage; the second is the loss from seeing only L2 at the assignment stage rather than the full covariate vector. When the chosen stratification variables are sufficient to make both losses vanish, the benchmark collapses to V1, recovering the single-stage bound of Appendix E.2. 

F. Proofs for Section 4 (Regression Adjustment) 

This appendix collects the proofs supporting the regression-adjustment route of Section 4: the excess-MSE decomposition (E.1), the general-case analysis (E.2), the linear-functional analysis (E.3), and the matching convergence-rate lower bound (E.4). 

F.1 Excess MSE Decomposition (Section 4.2) F.1.1 Proof of the Excess MSE Decomposition (Proposition 1) Write ˆθ − θ = ( ˜θ − θ) + (ˆθ − ˜θ). Squaring and taking expectations: 

E[( ˆθ − θ)2] = E[( ˜θ − θ)2] + E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] + 2 E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)( ˜θ − θ)] .

Subtracting E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] from both sides gives (10). The interaction term admits the Cauchy– Schwarz bound 

E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)( ˜θ − θ)] ≤

q

E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] ·

q

E[( ˜θ − θ)2], (63) which follows from |E[U V ]| ≤ pE[U 2]pE[V 2] with U = ˆθ − ˜θ and V = ˜θ − θ. ■

F.2 General Case (Section 4.3) 

Theorem 10 (Design optimization identity) . Under Assumption D.1, the design-optimization component of the excess MSE decomposition (10) satisfies 

E[( ˜θ − θ)2] − E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] = 1

n2

> B

X

> b=1

γb EL(e(b)) − L(e⋆) . (64) 

Proposition 7 (Per-batch design regret reduction) . In the setting of Theorem 10, with the plug-in Neyman allocation e(b+1) (x) = Φ( ˆ m(b)(x)) based on second-moment proxies ˆm(b),

EL(e(b+1) ) − L(e⋆) ≤ C E

"X

> a∈A

  ˆm(b) 

> a

(X) − ma(X)2

#

, (65) Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 53 

for a constant C depending only on (K, m min , m max ). Summing over batches yields the aggregated bound 

E[( ˜θ − θ)2] − E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] ≤ γ1

n2

 L(e(1) ) − L(e⋆) + Cn2

> B

X

> b=2

γb E

"X

> a

( ˆ m(b−1)  

> a

(X) − ma(X)) 2

#

. (66) 

F.2.1 Proof of the Design Optimization Identity (Theorem 10) Strategy. Within each batch the score contributions are conditionally i.i.d., so the conditional second moment of the per-batch contribution is exactly γb/n 2 times the EIF variance under that batch’s design. Summing over batches expresses the cumulative MSE of the IPW oracle as a weighted average of Var (φe(b) ), and the same identity for the deterministic oracle design e⋆ produces the asserted regret formula by subtraction. Within batch b, conditional on Hb, {φe(b) (Oi; η0) : i ∈ I b} are i.i.d. with mean 0 and variance 

Var (φe(b) (O; η0)). Thus, 

E

 1

n

X

> i∈I b

φe(b) (Oi; η0)

!2

Hb

 = γb

n2 Var (φe(b) (O; η0)) .

Summing over batches and applying the tower property: 

E[( ˜θ − θ)2] = 1

n2

> B

X

> b=1

γb E[Var (φe(b) (O; η0))] .

The same calculation with e⋆ (a deterministic design) gives E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] =

> 1
> n2

PBb=1 γb Var (φe⋆ (O; η0)). Subtracting, and using Var (φe(O; η0)) = Var (g(X) − θ) + L(e) where 

Var (g(X) − θ) does not depend on e, gives (64). ■

F.2.2 Proof of the Model Estimation Bound—General Case (Theorem 2) Strat-egy. Cross-fitting makes the per-batch score-difference summands {∆i : i ∈ I b} conditionally i.i.d. given the batch history. A Cauchy–Schwarz reduction over batches and a standard mean–variance expansion at the within-batch level yield two contributions: a variance term linear in γb d2 and a squared-bias term quadratic in γ2 

> b

d4. The first is controlled by the L2-Lipschitz condition on 

ψ (Assumption G3b), the second by the second-order remainder bound (41). Aggregating across batches gives (11). Define ∆ i := ψ(Oi; ˆ ηb(i), e (b(i)) ) − ψ(Oi; η0, e (b(i)) ) so that ˆθ − ˜θ = 1

> n

Pni=1 ∆i. Group by batch: 

Pni=1 ∆i = PBb=1 Sb where Sb := P 

> i∈I b

∆i.

Step 1: Cauchy–Schwarz over batches. 

> B

X

> b=1

Sb

!2

≤ B

> B

X

> b=1

S2 

> b

,54 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

hence E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] ≤ Bn2

PBb=1 E[S2 

> b

]. 

Step 2: Batch-wise second-moment expansion. Fix batch b. Conditional on Hb, ˆ ηb and e(b)

are deterministic, and {∆i : i ∈ I b} are i.i.d. Let ∆ b, 1 denote a representative copy. Then 

E[S2 

> b

| H b] = γb Var (∆ b, 1 | H b) + γ2 

> b

(E[∆ b, 1 | H b]) 2 . (67) 

Proof of (67) . Expand S2 

> b

= P 

> j

∆2 

> b,j

+ 2 P 

> j<k

∆b,j ∆b,k . Take E[· | H b]. For j̸ = k, conditional inde-pendence gives E[∆ b,j ∆b,k | H b] = μ2 

> b

with μb := E[∆ b, 1 | H b]. Also E[∆ 2 

> b,j

| H b] = σ2 

> b

+ μ2 

> b

with σ2 

> b

:= 

Var (∆ b, 1 | H b). Therefore E[S2 

> b

| H b] = γb(σ2 

> b

+ μ2 

> b

) + γb(γb − 1) μ2 

> b

= γbσ2 

> b

+ γ2 

> b

μ2 

> b

.

Step 3: Bounding conditional moments via Assumption G3b. Conditional on Hb, Ob, 1 is distributed as P0 with assignment e(b). Hence, by (42), 

E[∆ 2 

> b, 1

| H b] ≤ C2 d(ˆ ηb, η 0)2,

and by (41), |E[∆ b, 1 | H b]| ≤ Cmean d(ˆ ηb, η 0)2.

Step 4: Combining. Using Var (∆ b, 1 | H b) ≤ E[∆ 2 

> b, 1

| H b] in (67): 

E[S2 

> b

| H b] ≤ γbC2d(ˆ ηb, η 0)2 + γ2 

> b

C2mean d(ˆ ηb, η 0)4.

Taking expectations and summing over b:

E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] ≤ Bn2

> B

X

> b=1

E[S2 

> b

] ≤ B C 2

n2

> B

X

> b=1

γb E[d(ˆ ηb, η 0)2] + B C 2mean 

n2

> B

X

> b=1

γ2 

> b

E[d(ˆ ηb, η 0)4],

which is (11). ■

F.2.3 Proof of the Design Regret Reduction (Proposition 7) Strategy. The pointwise design cost Fx(e) := P 

> a

ma(x)/e a is strongly smooth at its interior minimizer e⋆(x), so a quadratic Taylor bound translates pointwise design errors into pointwise regret. The Neyman allocation map 

m 7 → Φ( m) is Lipschitz on the bounded second-moment set, so estimation errors in ˆ m propagate lin-early into design errors. Combining the two yields the per-batch quadratic bound (65); aggregating over batches via Theorem 10 gives (66). We prove the per-batch bound (65). Recall that under Assumption G4 the oracle design is 

e⋆a(x) = ma(x)1/2/ P 

> j∈A

mj (x)1/2, the plug-in design is e(b+1)  

> a

(x) = ˆ m(b) 

> a

(x)1/2/ P 

> j∈A

ˆm(b) 

> j

(x)1/2, and the design objective is L(e) = E[P 

> a∈A

ma(X)/e a(X)]. Both ma(x) and ˆ m(b) 

> a

(x) lie in [ mmin , m max ]. 

Step 1: Smoothness of the design cost at the minimizer. For a fixed covariate value x,define the pointwise design cost 

Fx(e) := X

> a∈A

ma(x)

ea

, e ∈ ∆K , e a ≥ ε0,Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 55 

where ε0 := m1/2min /(K m 1/2max ) > 0 is the natural lower bound on e⋆a(x) induced by ma ∈ [mmin , m max ]. The minimizer of Fx over the simplex ∆ K is the Neyman allocation e⋆(x), which is an interior point satisfying e⋆a(x) ≥ ε0 for all a.By the KKT conditions at the interior minimizer, 

∂F x

∂e a e=e⋆(x)

= − ma(x)

e⋆a(x)2 = λ(x), ∀ a ∈ A ,

for a common Lagrange multiplier λ(x). Therefore, for any e on the simplex, 

⟨∇ Fx(e⋆), e − e⋆⟩ = λ(x) X

> a∈A

(ea − e⋆a) = λ(x) · 0 = 0 ,

since both e and e⋆ sum to 1. By Taylor expansion with integral remainder, for any e with ea ≥ ε0,

Fx(e) − Fx(e⋆) = ⟨∇ Fx(e⋆), e − e⋆⟩

| {z }

> = 0

+ 12 (e − e⋆)⊤∇2Fx(¯ e) ( e − e⋆)for some ¯ e on the segment [ e⋆, e ]. The Hessian of Fx is diagonal: ∂2Fx 

> ∂e 2
> a

= 2 ma(x)/e 3

> a

, with all cross-derivatives zero. On the feasible set ea ≥ ε0 with ma ∈ [mmin , m max ], 

∂2Fx

∂e 2

> a

≤ 2mmax 

ε30

=: Hmax .

Hence 

Fx(e) − Fx(e⋆) ≤ Hmax 

2 ∥e − e⋆∥22. (68) 

Step 2: Lipschitz property of the Neyman allocation map. Define the Neyman allocation map Φ : [ mmin , m max ]K → ∆K by Φa(m) := m1/2

> a

P 

> j∈A

m1/2

> j

, a ∈ A .

On the compact set [ mmin , m max ]K , Φ is continuously differentiable. The partial derivative is 

∂Φa

∂m a

= 12m1/2

> a

P 

> j

m1/2

> j

− m1/2

> a

2m1/2

> a

 P  

> j

m1/2

> j

2 = 12m1/2

> a

P 

> j

m1/2

> j

(1 − Φa(m)) ,

and for a′̸ = a,

∂Φa

∂m a′

= − m1/2

> a

2m1/2

> a′

 P  

> j

m1/2

> j

2 = − Φa(m)2m1/2

> a′

P 

> j

m1/2

> j

.

All partial derivatives are bounded on [ mmin , m max ]K . Therefore Φ is Lipschitz: there exists CLip > 0, depending only on ( K, m min , m max ), such that 

∥Φ( ˆ m) − Φ( m)∥2 ≤ CLip ∥ ˆm − m∥2 ∀ m, ˆm ∈ [mmin , m max ]K . (69) 56 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Step 3: Combining. Since e(b+1) (x) = Φ( ˆ m(b)(x)) and e⋆(x) = Φ( m(x)), applying (69) pointwise gives 

∥e(b+1) (x) − e⋆(x)∥2 ≤ CLip ∥ ˆm(b)(x) − m(x)∥2.

Substituting into (68): 

Fx(e(b+1) ) − Fx(e⋆) ≤ Hmax 

2 ∥e(b+1) (x) − e⋆(x)∥22 ≤ Hmax C2Lip 

2 ∥ ˆm(b)(x) − m(x)∥22.

Taking the inner expectation over X (conditional on Hb, so that ˆ m(b) is fixed): 

L(e(b+1) ) − L(e⋆) = EX

FX (e(b+1) ) − FX (e⋆) ≤ C EX

"X

> a∈A

  ˆm(b) 

> a

(X) − ma(X)2

#

,

where C := Hmax C2Lip /2 depends only on ( K, m min , m max ). Taking the outer expectation over the training data (which determines ˆ m(b)) yields (65). 

Step 4: Aggregation over batches. By Theorem 10, the design term satisfies 

E[( ˜θ − θ)2] − E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] = 1

n2

> B

X

> b=1

γb EL(e(b)) − L(e⋆) .

Since e(1) is the deterministic initial design, its contribution is γ1

> n2

 L(e(1) ) − L(e⋆), which is a bounded constant times γ1/n 2. For each b ≥ 2, the design e(b) is the plug-in Neyman allocation based on ˆ m(b−1) , so (65) gives E[L(e(b)) − L(e⋆)] ≤ C E[P

> a∈A

( ˆ m(b−1)  

> a

(X) − ma(X)) 2]. Substituting: 1

n2

> B

X

> b=1

γb EL(e(b)) − L(e⋆) ≤ γ1

n2

 L(e(1) ) − L(e⋆) + Cn2

> B

X

> b=2

γb E

"X

> a∈A

  ˆm(b−1)  

> a

(X) − ma(X)2

#

,

which is (66). Since γ1/n 2 = o(1 /n ) for any schedule with γ1 = o(n), and PBb=2 γb/n 2 ≤ 1/n , both terms are o(1 /n ) whenever E[P

> a

( ˆ m(b) 

> a

− ma)2] → 0 (consistency). ■

F.2.4 Proof of the Design Learning Bound (Theorem 3) The body’s Theorem 3 is the aggregated form of the previous two results: the design-optimization identity translates the cumulative design regret into the average per-batch loss gap, and the per-batch regret reduction translates each loss gap into the second-moment estimation error of ˆ m(b−1) .

Proof of Theorem 3. By Theorem 10 and Proposition 7, the cumulative design regret satisfies the explicit-constant bound (66), namely 

E

h

(˜θ − θ)2

i

− E(θ⋆n − θ)2 ≤ γ1

n2

 L(e(1) ) − L(e⋆) + Cn2

> B

X

> b=2

γb E

"X

> a∈A

  ˆm(b−1)  

> a

(X) − ma(X)2

#

.

Under the standing batch schedule γ1 = o(n) (so γ1/n 2 = o(1 /n )) and a bounded initial design objective L(e(1) ) ≤ Lmax , the first summand is absorbed into the ≲ symbol. The constant C in the second summand depends only on ( K, m min , m max ) and is likewise absorbed. This gives 

E

h

(˜θ − θ)2

i

− E(θ⋆n − θ)2 ≲ 1

n2

> B

X

> b=2

γb E

"X

> a∈A

  ˆm(b−1)  

> a

(X) − ma(X)2

#

,

which is exactly the statement (12). ■Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 57 

F.2.5 Proof of the Main Achievability Result (Corollary 1) Strategy. Combine the excess-MSE decomposition (Proposition 1) with the two preceding bounds: model estimation (The-orem 2) and design learning (Theorem 3). The interaction term is controlled by Cauchy–Schwarz (63). The hypotheses—consistent second-moment proxies and a nuisance rate strictly faster than 

n−1/4—are exactly what makes each term o(1 /n ). 

Proof of Corollary 1. By Proposition 1, 

E[( ˆθ − θ)2] = E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] + E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2]

| {z }

> model

+ E[( ˜θ − θ)2] − E[( θ⋆n − θ)2]

| {z }

> design

+ 2 E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)( ˜θ − θ)] 

| {z }

> cross

. (70) We control the four terms in turn. 

(i) Oracle. The oracle estimator θ⋆n = θ + 1

> n

Pni=1 φe⋆ (Oi; η0) uses the deterministic design e⋆ and the true nuisance, so the summands are i.i.d. with mean zero and variance V ⋆ = E[φe⋆ (O; η0)2]. Hence 

E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] = V ⋆

n .

(ii) Model term. By hypothesis, d(ˆ ηb, η 0) = OP (n−α) with α > 1/4, so E[d(ˆ ηb, η 0)2] ≲ n−2α and 

E[d(ˆ ηb, η 0)4] ≲ n−4α. Substituting into (11), 

E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] ≲ Bn2

> B

X

> b=1

γb n−2α + Bn2

> B

X

> b=1

γ2 

> b

n−4α ≤ Bn n−2α + B2γ2

> B

n2 n−4α.

With the geometric schedule γB ≍ n and B ≍ log n, the first term is O(log n · n−1−2α) = o(1 /n ) (any 

α > 0), and the second is O(log 2n · n−4α), which is o(1 /n ) precisely when 4 α > 1, i.e., α > 1/4. Hence E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] = o(1 /n ). 

(iii) Design term. By hypothesis, the second-moment proxies are consistent, so ϵb := 

E[P

> a

( ˆ m(b) 

> a

(X) − ma(X)) 2] → 0. Substituting into Theorem 3, 

E[( ˜θ − θ)2] − E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] ≲ 1

n2

> B

X

> b=2

γb ϵb−1 ≤ max b≥1 ϵb

n2

> B

X

> b=2

γb ≤ max b ϵb

n = o(1 /n ),

using PBb=2 γb ≤ n.

(iv) Cross term. The realized i.i.d.-by-batch IPW score ˜θ − θ = 1

> n

P

> b

P 

> i∈I b

φe(b) (Oi; η0) has, con-ditional on Hb, mean zero and per-batch variance Ve(b) /γ b ≤ Vmax /γ b, with Vmax := sup e∈E , e a≥ε Ve <

∞ by the propensity-floor and bounded-second-moment parts of Assumption D.1. Summing the conditional variances by the tower property gives 

E[( ˜θ − θ)2] = 1

n2

> B

X

> b=1

γb E[Ve(b) ] ≤ Vmax 

n .

Combining with (ii) and the Cauchy–Schwarz bound (63), 

2 E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)( ˜θ − θ)] ≤ 2

q

E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] ·

q

E[( ˜θ − θ)2] ≤ 2po(1 /n ) · O(1 /n ) = o(1 /n ).58 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Conclusion. Substituting (i)–(iv) into (70), 

E[( ˆθ − θ)2] = V ⋆

n + o(1 /n ) + o(1 /n ) + o(1 /n ) = V ⋆

n + o(1 /n ).

■

F.3 Linear-Functional Case (Section 4.4) F.3.1 Proof of Global Unbiasedness (Proposition 2) Fix x. Expand the conditional expectation: 

E[ψ(O; ˜ μ, e ) | X = x] = X

> a∈A

ωa(x)˜ μa(x) + X

> a∈A

ωa(x) E

 1{A = a}

ea(x)

 Y − ˜μa(x) X = x



.

For each a, apply iterated expectation conditioning on A:

E

 1{A = a}

ea(x)

 Y − ˜μa(x) X = x



= 1

ea(x) P(A = a | X = x) E[Y − ˜μa(x) | X = x, A = a].

Since P(A = a | X = x) = ea(x) and E[Y | X = x, A = a] = μa(x), the above equals μa(x) − ˜μa(x). Substituting back: 

E[ψ(O; ˜ μ, e ) | X = x] = X

> a∈A

ωa(x)˜ μa(x) + X

> a∈A

ωa(x) μa(x) − ˜μa(x) = X

> a∈A

ωa(x)μa(x).

Taking expectation over X yields E[ψ(O; ˜ μ, e )] = θ. ■

F.3.2 Proof of Cross-Term Cancellation (Proposition 2) Write ∆1 = ˆθ − ˜θ = 1

n

> B

X

> b=1

X

> i∈I b

∆b,i , ∆b,i := ψ(Oi; ˆ μb, e (b)) − ψ(Oi; μ, e (b)),

and ∆2 = ˜θ − θ = 1

n

> B

X

> b=1

X

> i∈I b

Γb,i , Γb,i := ψ(Oi; μ, e (b)) − θ. 

Under two-fold cross-fitting, ˆ μb is constructed from the opposite fold and is independent of the evaluation observations {Oi : i ∈ I b} conditional on Hb. By Proposition 2, for each i ∈ I b,

E[∆ b,i | H b] = 0 .

Moreover, Γ b,i is σ(Hb, O i)-measurable. Therefore 

E[∆ b,i Γb,j | H b] = E[E[∆ b,i | H b, O j ]Γ b,j |H b] = 0 for all i, j in batch b, and similarly across different batches by tower property. Hence 

E[∆ 1∆2] = 1

n2

X

> b,b ′

X

> i∈I b

X

> j∈I b′

E[∆ b,i Γb′,j ] = 0 .

So the cross term is exactly zero: E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)( ˜θ − θ)] = 0. ■Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 59 

F.3.3 Proof of the Model Estimation Bound—Linear Case (Theorem 4) Strategy. 

The exact global unbiasedness of the linear-functional EIF (Proposition 2) makes the conditional mean of each per-batch summand identically zero, so the squared-bias contribution disappears entirely. What remains is the variance term, which the IPW representation bounds by a constant multiple of E[P 

> a

ω2

> a

(ˆ μb,a − μa)2]. The propensity floor e(b) 

> a

≥ ε controls the IPW factor, and assump-tion (15) converts the nuisance error into the rate n−2α. This gives the sharp rate (16) without the 

n−1/4 bottleneck of the general case. Define ∆ i := ψ(Oi; ˆ μb(i), e (b(i)) )−ψ(Oi; μ, e (b(i)) ) so that ˆθ − ˜θ = 1

> n

Pni=1 ∆i. Group by batch: ˆθ − ˜θ =

> 1
> n

PBb=1 Sb where Sb := P 

> i∈I b

∆i.

Step 1: Cauchy–Schwarz over batches. By Jensen’s inequality (or Cauchy–Schwarz), 

 P Bb=1 Sb

2 ≤ B PBb=1 S2 

> b

, hence 

E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] ≤ Bn2

> B

X

> b=1

E[S2 

> b

].

Step 2: Batch-wise second-moment expansion. Fix batch b and condition on Hb. Under cross-fitting, ˆ μb is Hb-measurable, and {∆i : i ∈ I b} are conditionally i.i.d. Let ∆ b, 1 denote a representative copy with μb := E[∆ b, 1 | H b] and σ2 

> b

:= Var (∆ b, 1 | H b). Expanding S2 

> b

= P 

> j

∆2 

> b,j

+ 2 P 

> j<k

∆b,j ∆b,k 

and taking E[· | H b] gives 

E[S2 

> b

| H b] = γb σ2 

> b

+ γ2 

> b

μ2 

> b

.

By Proposition 2 with ˜ μ = ˆ μb, we have E[ψ(O; ˆ μb, e (b)) | H b] = θ and E[ψ(O; μ, e (b)) | H b] = θ, hence 

μb = E[∆ b, 1 | H b] = 0. Therefore E[S2 

> b

| H b] = γb Var (∆ b, 1 | H b) ≤ γb E[∆ 2 

> b, 1

| H b]. 

Step 3: Bounding the conditional second moment. 

Now expand ∆ b, 1 using (13): ∆b, 1 = X

> a∈A

ωa(X) ˆμb,a (X) − μa(X) − X

> a∈A

1{A = a}

e(b) 

> a

(X) ωa(X) ˆμb,a (X) − μa(X).

Apply ( u − v)2 ≤ 2u2 + 2 v2 with u = P 

> a

ωa(X)(ˆ μb,a − μa) and v = P  

> a
> 1{A=a}
> e(b)
> a(X)

ωa(X)(ˆ μb,a − μa): 

E[∆ 2 

> b, 1

| H b] ≤ 2 E[u2 | H b] + 2 E[v2 | H b].

For the first term, by Cauchy–Schwarz in RK :

u2 ≤ K X

> a∈A

ωa(X)2(ˆ μb,a (X) − μa(X)) 2.

For the second term, since only one arm is selected: 

v2 = ωA(X)

e(b) 

> A

(X) (ˆ μb,A (X) − μA(X)) 

!2

≤ 1

ε2

X

> a∈A

1{A = a} ωa(X)2(ˆ μb,a (X) − μa(X)) 2.60 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Taking E[· | H b] and using E[1{A = a} | X, Hb] = e(b) 

> a

(X) ≤ 1: 

E[∆ 2 

> b, 1

| H b] ≤ C E

"X

> a∈A

ωa(X)2(ˆ μb,a (X) − μa(X)) 2 Hb

#

,

for C = 2 K + 2 /ε 2. Taking expectations and applying (15) gives E[∆ 2

> b, 1

] ≤ CC μn−2α. Therefore 

E[S2 

> b

] ≤ γbCC μn−2α, hence 

E[( ˆθ − ˜θ)2] ≤ Bn2

> B

X

> b=1

γb CC μn−2α = B CC μ

n n−2α,

which is (16). ■

F.3.4 Proof of the Design Suboptimality Bound (Theorem 4) Strategy. In the linear-functional case the relevant “effective allocation weight” is ra(x) := |ωa(x)|σa(x), and the oracle design e⋆ = Φ( r) is its Neyman allocation. The design cost G(u, r ) = P 

> a

u2

> a

/Φa(r) is Lipschitz in its second argument on the bounded simplex, so L(e(b+1) ) − L(e⋆) ≲ ∥ˆr(b) − r∥2. The Lipschitz square-root then converts the σ2-estimation rate (15) into a design-regret rate, and aggregating across batches yields the o(1 /n ) design contribution (72). We work in the linear-functional case where va(μ)( x, y ) = ωa(x)( y − μa(x)) and the design objec-tive is L(e) = E[P 

> a

ωa(X)2σ2

> a

(X)/e a(X)]. Define the effective allocation weight 

ra(x) := |ωa(x)| σa(x), a ∈ A ,

where σa(x) = pσ2

> a

(x) = pVar (Y | X = x, A = a). Then the oracle design (7) is e⋆a(x) = 

ra(x)/ P 

> j

rj (x), and the plug-in design is e(b+1)  

> a

(x) = ˆ r(b) 

> a

(x)/ P 

> j

ˆr(b) 

> j

(x) where ˆr(b) 

> a

(x) := 

|ωa(x)|ˆσ(b) 

> a

(x). For any candidate vector r ∈ RK 

> +

with ra ≥ rmin := ∥ω∥−1 

> ∞

· σmin , define the Neyman allocation map Φ a(r) := ra/ P 

> j

rj and the design cost 

G(u, r ) := 

> K

X

> a=1

u2

> a

Φa(r) ,

so that L(e⋆) = E[G(r(X), r (X))] where r(X) = (r1(X), . . . , r K (X)), and L(e(b+1) ) =

E[G(r(X), ˆr(b)(X))]. Because σmin ≤ σa, ˆσ(b) 

> a

≤ σmax on the clipped event, and ωa is bounded, the map G is smooth on the compact set [ rmin , r max ]K × [rmin , r max ]K where rmax := ∥ω∥∞σmax . Hence G is Lipschitz in the second argument: 

|G(u, r ) − G(u, r ′)| ≤ C1∥r − r′∥2,Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 61 

for a constant C1 depending only on ( K, r min , r max ). Applying this with u = r(X), r = ˆ r(b)(X), 

r′ = r(X) yields 

L(e(b+1) ) − L(e⋆) ≤ C1 E∥ˆr(b)(X) − r(X)∥2

 ≤ C1

q

E[∥ˆr(b)(X) − r(X)∥22].

Since ωa is known, we have |ˆr(b) 

> a

− ra| = |ωa| · | ˆσ(b) 

> a

− σa|. By the Lipschitz property of the square root on [ σ2min , σ 2max ]: |ˆσ(b) 

> a

− σa| ≤ (2 σmin )−1|ˆσ2,(b) 

> a

− σ2

> a

|. Therefore 

E∥ˆr(b)(X) − r(X)∥22

 ≤ ∥ω∥2

> ∞

4σ2min 

E

" KX

> a=1

 ˆσ2,(b) 

> a

(X) − σ2

> a

(X)2

#

≤ C C σ n−2β

by Assumption L3 (15). Combining the displays gives 

EL(e(b)) − L(e⋆) ≤ C C σ γ−2βb−1 , (71) where C depends only on ( K, σ min , σ max , ∥ω∥∞). 

Aggregation over batches. By Theorem 10, the design term satisfies E[( ˜θ − θ)2] − E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] = 

> 1
> n2

PBb=1 γb E[L(e(b)) − L(e⋆)]. The first batch contributes γ1 

> n2

(L(e(1) ) − L(e⋆)), which is o(1 /n ) for 

γ1 = o(n). For each b ≥ 2, applying (71) gives E[L(e(b)) − L(e⋆)] ≤ C C σ γ−2βb−1 . Hence 1

n2

> B

X

> b=2

γb E[L(e(b)) − L(e⋆)] ≤ C C σ

n2

> B

X

> b=2

γb γ−2βb−1 .

For the geometric batch schedule γb ≍ nb/B , the dominant term in the sum is at b = B, giving 

γB γ−2βB−1 ≍ n · n−2β(B−1) /B = n1−2β(1 −1/B ). Thus the sum is O n1−2β(1 −1/B ), and the full design term satisfies 

E[( ˜θ − θ)2] − E[( θ⋆n − θ)2] = O n−1−2β(1 −1/B ) = o(1 /n ) for any β > 0. (72) 

■

F.4 Convergence-Rate Lower Bound (Section 4.4) F.4.1 Proof of the Linear-Case Convergence Lower Bound (Theorem 5) We prove the theorem through two explicit Assouad constructions: 

• Example I (fixed variance, varying mean): all arm variances are identical and fixed, while one arm’s conditional mean varies over a hypercube. 

• Example II (fixed mean, varying variance): all conditional means are identical and fixed, while one arm’s variance varies over a hypercube, which forces e⋆ to vary. All constructions respect non-anticipation in Assumption G1. 62 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Lemma 4 (Adaptive KL chain rule) . Fix any non-anticipating experiment ALG . Let P and 

Q be two environments with the same covariate marginal PX and the same assignment kernels induced by ALG . Denote by P ALG and QALG the induced trajectory laws of Fn = ( X1: n, A 1: n, Y 1: n). Then 

KL( P ALG ∥ QALG ) = 

> n

X

> t=1

EP ALG [KL( P (Yt | Xt, A t) ∥ Q(Yt | Xt, A t))] .

Proof. Write the trajectory density by chain rule: 

p(fn) = pX (x1: n)

> n

Y

> t=1

πt(at | xt, f t−1) p(yt | xt, a t),

and similarly for q(fn). Since ALG is fixed, the assignment kernels cancel in log p(fn) 

> q(fn)

. Taking expec-tation under P ALG yields the stated identity. ■

Lemma 5 (Joint convexity of KL for mixtures) . Let {Pi}i∈I and {Qi}i∈I be distributions on a common measurable space, and {αi}i∈I satisfy αi ≥ 0, P 

> i

αi = 1 . Define ¯P = P 

> i

αiPi and 

¯Q = P 

> i

αiQi. Then 

KL( ¯P ∥ ¯Q) ≤ X

> i

αi KL( Pi ∥ Qi).

Proof. This is the log-sum inequality, equivalently joint convexity of ( u, v ) 7 → u log( u/v ) after integrating with respect to a common dominating measure. ■

Lemma 6 (Assouad reduction via one-bit testing) . Let {Pω : ω ∈ {− 1, +1 }m} be a hyper-cube family, and let ω(k) denote the vector with bit k flipped. Define 

¯Pk, + := 2 −(m−1) X 

> ω:ωk=+1

Pω , ¯Pk, − := 2 −(m−1) X 

> ω:ωk=−1

Pω .

If sup ω,k KL( Pω ∥Pω(k) ) ≤ κ, then for every decoder ˆω based on the trajectory, 

sup 

> ω

Eω [dH (ˆ ω, ω )] ≥ c0m, 

where c0 > 0 depends only on κ.

Proof. By Lemma 5, KL( ¯Pk, +∥ ¯Pk, −) ≤ 2−(m−1) X 

> ω:ωk=+1

KL( Pω ∥Pω(k) ) ≤ κ. 

Le Cam + Pinsker imply a constant lower bound on bit-k testing error under ¯Pk, + versus ¯Pk, −.Summing over k = 1 , . . . , m gives the Hamming lower bound. ■

Shared hypercube geometry. Let X = [0 , 1] with PX = Unif[0 , 1] and partition X = ∪mk=1 Bk into equal bins PX (Bk) = 1 /m . Let ψk(x) := 1{x ∈ Bk}. For ω ∈ {− 1, +1 }m and amplitude δ > 0, define 

fω (x) := δ

> m

X

> k=1

ωkψk(x).Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 63 

Here ψk denotes bump basis functions only; it is unrelated to the score notation ψ(O; η, e ) used in Section 4. If ˆ ω is the decoded sign pattern, then 

∥fˆω − fω ∥2  

> L2(PX)

= 4δ2

m dH (ˆ ω, ω ).

Hence once neighbor KL is uniformly bounded, minimax L2 risk is ≳ δ2.

Lemma 7 (Efficiency-gap identity via Cauchy projection) . Fix one environment P in the linear model and let e⋆ be its oracle design. Write 

V ⋆(P ) := EP

φe⋆ (O; ηP )2 , ˆθoracle := θ(P ) + 1

n

> n

X

> t=1

φe⋆ (Ot; ηP ).

For any estimator T = T (Fn) that is locally unbiased along the least-favorable one-dimensional submodel through P ,

Var P (T ) − V ⋆(P )

n = EP



T − ˆθoracle 

2

. (73) 

Proof. Let 

Z(Fn) := 

> n

X

> t=1

φe⋆ (Ot; ηP )

V ⋆(P ) .

By local unbiasedness along the least-favorable submodel and the score identity, EP [( T − EP T )Z] = 1. Since {φe⋆ (Ot; ηP )} are i.i.d. mean-zero with variance V ⋆(P ), EP [Z2] = n/V ⋆(P ). Apply the projection identity 

Var (T ) − E[( T − ET )Z]2

E[Z2] = E



(T − ET ) − E[( T − ET )Z]

E[Z2] Z

2

.

Substitute the two moments above and EP [T ] = θ(P ) to obtain 

Var P (T ) − V ⋆(P )

n = EP

 T − θ(P ) − 1

n

> n

X

> t=1

φe⋆ (Ot; ηP )

!2 ,

which is exactly (73). ■

Proposition 8 (Assouad lower bound for estimating μ under fixed σ2). There exists a subfamily Pμ with fixed {σ2

> a

}a∈A such that, for any non-anticipating experiment-estimator pair, 

inf  

> ˆμ

sup  

> P∈P μ

EP

"X

> a∈A

∥ˆμa − μa∥2 

> L2(PX)

#

≥ cμ n−2α. (74) 

Proof. Fix an arm a0. In this subfamily, all arms have identical known variance σ2 > 0 and all means are zero except arm a0:

μa0,ω (x) = fω (x), μa,ω (x) ≡ 0 ( a̸ = a0).64 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Outcomes are Gaussian: 

Yt | (Xt = x, A t = a) ∼

(

N (μa0,ω (x), σ 2), a = a0,

N (0 , σ 2), a̸ = a0.

Therefore σ2

> a

(x) ≡ σ2 for every arm and every environment ω, so e⋆ is fixed across this family. Let ω(k) flip bit k. For Gaussian location models with common variance, KL  N (u, σ 2) ∥ N (v, σ 2) = (u − v)2

2σ2 .

Using Lemma 4, KL( P ALG  

> ω

∥ P ALG  

> ω(k)

) ≤

> n

X

> t=1

Eω

 (μa0,ω (Xt) − μa0,ω (k) (Xt)) 2

2σ2 1{At = a0}



.

Since neighbors differ only on Bk and by magnitude 2 δ there, (μa0,ω (x) − μa0,ω (k) (x)) 2 = 4 δ21{x ∈ Bk},

hence KL( P ALG  

> ω

∥ P ALG  

> ω(k)

) ≤ 2δ2

σ2

> n

X

> t=1

Eω [1{Xt ∈ Bk}1{At = a0}] ≤ 2δ2nσ2m .

Choose ( m, δ ) so that δ2n/m ≤ c. Then Lemma 6 implies Hamming risk ≳ m, and therefore inf  

> ˆμ

sup 

> ω

Eω

∥ˆμa0 − μa0,ω ∥2 

> L2(PX)

 ≳ δ2.

All other arms are fixed, so the same lower bound holds for P 

> a

∥ˆμa − μa∥2 

> L2

. In this example, 

σ2 is fixed, hence e⋆ is fixed, and the oracle efficient estimator ˆθoracle depends on the unknown environment only through μ in φe⋆ (·; μ). Therefore the same Assouad testing difficulty implies that no data-based T can uniformly satisfy Eω [( T − ˆθoracle ,ω )2] = o(δ2). By Lemma 7, inf  

> T

sup 

> ω



Var ω (T ) − V ⋆ω

n



≥ inf  

> T

sup 

> ω

Eω [( T − ˆθoracle ,ω )2] ≳ δ2.

Matching the hypercube size with the complexity exponent underlying α gives δ2 ≍ n−2α, proving (74). ■

Proposition 9 (Assouad lower bound for design learning through σ2). There exists a subfamily Pσ2 with fixed μ = {μa}a∈A such that, for any non-anticipating design learner, 

inf  

> ˆe

sup  

> P∈P σ2

EP [L(ˆ e) − L(e⋆)] ≥ cσ n−2β . (75) Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 65 

Proof. Fix μa(x) ≡ 0 for all arms. Fix one arm a0 and vary only its conditional variance: 

σ2 

> a0,ω

(x) = 1 + fω (x), σ2 

> a,ω

(x) ≡ 1 ( a̸ = a0).

Take Gaussian outcomes 

Yt | (Xt = x, A t = a) ∼ N (0 , σ 2 

> a,ω

(x)) .

For sufficiently small δ, all variances lie in [1 /2, 3/2]. For zero-mean Gaussians with u, v ∈ [1 /2, 3/2], KL( N (0 , u ) ∥ N (0 , v )) = 12

 uv − 1 − log uv



≤ C(u − v)2.

Hence, by Lemma 4, KL( P ALG  

> ω

∥P ALG  

> ω(k)

) ≤ C

> n

X

> t=1

Eω

h

(σ2 

> a0,ω

(Xt) − σ2 

> a0,ω (k)

(Xt)) 21{At = a0}

i

≤ Cδ 2nm .

With δ2n/m ≤ c, Lemma 6 yields inf 

> cσ2

sup 

> ω

Eω

h

∥cσ2a0 − σ2 

> a0,ω

∥2 

> L2(PX)

i

≳ δ2.

Now transfer this to design regret. We take unit weights ωa ≡ 1 (which corresponds to the ATE estimand), so that ma(x) = ω2

> a

σ2

> a

(x) = σ2

> a

(x) and L(e) = E[P 

> a

σ2

> a

(X)/e a(X)]. In this family, 

e⋆a0,ω (x) = σω (x)

σω (x) + ( K − 1) , σω (x) := 

q

σ2 

> a0,ω

(x),

so changing σω changes e⋆ω pointwise. On σ ∈ [p1/2, p3/2], the map σ 7 → σ/ (σ + K − 1) has derivative bounded away from 0 and ∞; therefore there exist c1, c 2 > 0 such that 

c1|σ2 

> a0,ω

(x) − σ2 

> a0,ω ′

(x)| ≤ | e⋆a0,ω (x) − e⋆a0,ω ′ (x)| ≤ c2|σ2 

> a0,ω

(x) − σ2 

> a0,ω ′

(x)|.

Also, for fixed x, e 7 → Lx(e) := P 

> a

σ2

> a

(x)/e a is strongly convex on {e ∈ ∆K : ea ≥ ε}, so 

Lx(e) − Lx(e⋆ω ) ≥ c3∥e − e⋆ω ∥22.

Integrating gives 

E[L(ˆ e) − L(e⋆ω )] ≥ c4 E∥ˆe − e⋆ω ∥2 

> L2(PX)

 .

By bi-Lipschitzness of σ2 7 → e⋆ on this family, a regret rate o(δ2) would imply a σ2-estimator with 

o(δ2) L2 error, contradicting the Assouad lower bound above. Therefore inf  

> ˆe

sup 

> ω

Eω [L(ˆ e) − L(e⋆ω )] ≳ δ2.66 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

In this example, μ is fixed and the unknown part is only σ2 (equivalently σ), which determines e⋆ω

and therefore the oracle EIF φe⋆ω (O; ηω ). Hence inability to learn σ2 implies inability to track the oracle efficient estimator ˆθoracle ,ω = θω + n−1 P 

> t

φe⋆ω (Ot; ηω ), and Lemma 7 yields inf  

> T

sup 

> ω



Var ω (T ) − V ⋆ω

n



≳ δ2.

Matching the hypercube size with the complexity exponent underlying β gives δ2 ≍ n−2β , yielding (75). ■

Completion of Theorem 5. Equation (74) is Proposition 8 and (75) is Proposition 9. Example I keeps σ2 fixed, so e⋆ and the oracle EIF-variance target are fixed; only the model-estimation component can vary. Example II keeps μ fixed and varies σ = √σ2, so e⋆ must vary and the design component is unavoidable. Together with Proposition 1 and (16), (71), (17), this yields the unavoidable scales n−1−2α and n−1−2β above V ⋆/n (up to constants/log factors). ■

G. Proofs for Section 5 (Covariate Balancing) 

This appendix collects the proofs supporting the covariate-balancing route of Section 5: the alge-braic three-term decomposition that organizes the analysis (F.1), the single-tuple variance formula together with its randomized-rounding contribution (F.2–F.3), the global variance bound (F.4), and the resulting semiparametric efficiency theorem (F.5). 

G.1 Three-Term Decomposition 

Strategy. We derive Proposition 3 by Taylor-expanding the moment equation around θ0, then conditioning on the per-batch history to split the resulting score sum into an oracle-EIF piece, a design gap, and a balancing remainder. 

Proof of Proposition 3. A standard mean-value expansion of the moment equation (21) around 

θ0 gives 

√n(ˆθn − θ0) = −M −1 · 1

√n

> n

X

> i=1

m(Xi, A i, Y i, θ 0) + oP (1) ,

where M is the Jacobian in (20). Define ϕa(X) := E[m(X, a, Y, θ 0) | X] = −M ω a(X). Conditionally on the batch history Hb(i), adding and subtracting P 

> a

e(b(i))  

> a

(Xi)ϕa(Xi) inside m(Xi, A i, Y i, θ 0)decomposes the summand into (a) a batch-conditional EIF contribution under e(b(i)) and (b) an imbalance residual P

> a

(1{Ai = a} − e(b(i))  

> a

(Xi)) ωa(Xi) (after multiplying by −M −1). Replacing 

e(b(i)) by e⋆ inside the first piece and collecting the difference as the design gap yields the three-term form in (23). The oP (1) remainder absorbs the Taylor-expansion error under the standard regularity conditions for M -estimators. ■Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 67 

G.2 Single-Tuple Variance Formula 

Proposition 10 (Single-tuple variance formula) . Within a complete tuple of length G with count vector Lr and per-position weight matrices {Wt}Gt=1 (columns ωa(Xr,t )), the imbalance incre-ment Tr = P 

> t

Wt(et − η) satisfies 

Var (Tr | Lr ) = GG − 1

> G

X

> t=1

Wt Σ( p) W ⊤ 

> t

− 1

G − 1

 GX

> t=1

Wt



Σ( p)

 GX

> t=1

Wt

⊤

, (76) 

where p = Lr /G and Σ( p) = diag( p) − pp ⊤.

Remark 5 (Rounding variance). When Gη is not integer-valued, the count vector Lr is drawn from a randomized rounding scheme satisfying E[Lr ] = Gη and Var (Lr,j ) ≤ 1/4. By the law of total variance, this adds a rounding-variance term (II) to Var (Tr | F r−1) beyond the permutation term (I); its trace norm satisfies tr((II) r ) = O(K/G ) uniformly in the tuple. 

G.2.1 Proof of the Single-Tuple Variance Formula (Proposition 10) Strategy. Con-ditional on the count vector Lr , the within-tuple assignment is a uniform permutation of a finite multiset—a sampling-without-replacement structure. Computing the marginal and cross-position covariances of the one-hot encodings from first principles yields the classical finite-population cor-rection factor −Σ( p)/(G − 1). Summing weighted contributions across the tuple positions and collapsing the off-diagonal sum into a square-of-sum minus diagonal then produces the closed-form variance (76). Fix a tuple with realized length ℓr ≤ G and count vector Lr . Let et ∈ RK be the one-hot encoding of Ar,t , and let p := Lr /G . All moments below are conditioned on Fr−1 and Lr .

Step 1: Reduce to centered one-hot vectors. Write Tr = Pℓr 

> t=1

Wt (et − η) where Wt ∈ Rq×K

has column a equal to ωa(Xr,t ). Since η is non-random given Fr−1 and Wt is Fr−1-measurable (the covariates are known before randomization), Var (Tr | F r−1, L r ) = Var  P ℓr 

> t=1

Wt et | Lr

. Define 

V := Pℓr 

> t=1

Wt et.

Step 2: Without-replacement covariance structure—derivation from first principles. 

Given Lr , the assignment ( Ar, 1, . . . , A r,G ) is a uniform random permutation of a sequence containing 

Lr,a copies of arm a for each a ∈ A . This is equivalent to sampling without replacement from a finite population of size G.

Marginal mean. For any position t ∈ { 1, . . . , G } and arm a, by symmetry of the uniform permu-tation, P(Ar,t = a | Lr ) = Lr,a /G = pa. Hence E[et | Lr ] = p.

Marginal covariance. For a single position t, ( et)a = 1{Ar,t = a} is Bernoulli( pa) given Lr . There-fore Var (( et)a | Lr ) = pa(1 − pa) and for a̸ = b, Cov(( et)a, (et)b | Lr ) = E[1{Ar,t = a}1{Ar,t = b} | 

Lr ] − papb = 0 − papb = −papb, since Ar,t takes a single value. In matrix form: Cov( et | Lr ) = diag( p) − pp ⊤ =: Σ( p). 68 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

Cross-position covariance. For s̸ = t, we need E[( es)a(et)b | Lr ] = P(Ar,s = a, A r,t = b | Lr ). By the permutation structure: 

P(Ar,s = a, A r,t = b | Lr ) = 

( Lr,a (Lr,a −1)  

> G(G−1)

, a = b,   

> Lr,a Lr,b
> G(G−1)

, a̸ = b. 

Therefore, for s̸ = t:Cov  (es)a, (et)a | Lr

 = Lr,a (Lr,a − 1) 

G(G − 1) − p2 

> a

= pa(pa − 1/G )1 − 1/G − p2 

> a

= − pa(1 − pa)

G − 1 ,

Cov  (es)a, (et)b | Lr

 = Lr,a Lr,b 

G(G − 1) − papb = papb

1 − 1/G − papb = papb

G − 1 , a̸ = b. 

Combining in matrix form: Cov( es, e t | Lr ) = − 1

G − 1 Σ( p), s̸ = t. (77) This is the classical finite-population correction factor −1/(G − 1). 

Step 3: Expand the variance of V . Since Wt is non-random given the conditioning: 

Var (V | Lr ) = 

> ℓr

X

> t=1

Var (Wt et | Lr ) + 2 X

> 1≤s<t ≤ℓr

Cov( Ws es, W t et | Lr )=

> ℓr

X

> t=1

Wt Σ( p) W ⊤ 

> t

+ 2 X

> 1≤s<t ≤ℓr

Ws Cov( es, e t | Lr ) W ⊤

> t

=

> ℓr

X

> t=1

Wt Σ( p) W ⊤ 

> t

− 2

G − 1

X

> 1≤s<t ≤ℓr

Ws Σ( p) W ⊤ 

> t

.

Step 4: Algebraic simplification. Write the double sum over off-diagonal pairs using P 

> s̸=t

=

 P 

> t

 P 

> t

⊤ − P

> t

(·)2:2 X

> s<t

WsΣ( p)W ⊤ 

> t

= X

> s̸=t

WsΣ( p)W ⊤

> t

=

X 

> t

Wt



Σ( p)

X 

> t

Wt

⊤

− X

> t

WtΣ( p)W ⊤ 

> t

.

Substituting: 

Var (V | Lr ) = X

> t

WtΣ( p)W ⊤ 

> t

− 1

G − 1

"X 

> t

Wt



Σ( p)

X 

> t

Wt

⊤

− X

> t

WtΣ( p)W ⊤

> t

#

= GG − 1

> ℓr

X

> t=1

WtΣ( p)W ⊤ 

> t

− 1

G − 1

 ℓrX

> t=1

Wt



Σ( p)

 ℓrX

> t=1

Wt

⊤

,

which is (76). ■Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 69 

G.3 Randomized Rounding Variance 

Strategy. The law of total variance splits the tuple-level variance into a permutation-variance term (already controlled by Proposition 10) and a rounding-variance term arising from the randomness in Lr = ⌊Gη ⌋ + 1{· ∈ S}. Each Lr,j is a Bernoulli-shifted floor with variance bounded by 1 /4; this bounds Var (p) in operator norm by K/ (4 G2), and a Frobenius-norm bound on the summed weight matrix ¯W converts that into the asserted O(K/G ) trace-norm contribution. We prove the claim in Remark 5 that the randomized rounding contributes O(K/G ) to the trace-norm of the per-tuple variance. By the law of total variance, conditioning on Lr :

Var (Tr | F r−1) = E[Var (Tr | F r−1, L r ) | F r−1]

| {z }

> (I): permutation variance

+ Var (E[Tr | F r−1, L r ] | F r−1)

| {z }

> (II): rounding variance

.

Term (I) is the expected version of the formula in Proposition 10, averaged over Lr .For term (II), note that E[Tr | F r−1, L r ] = Pℓr

> t=1

P

> a

(E[1{Ar,t = a} | Lr ] − ηa) ωa(Xr,t ) = 

Pℓr

> t=1

P

> a

(pa − ηa) ωa(Xr,t ) where pa = Lr,a /G . Define ¯W := Pℓr 

> t=1

Wt ∈ Rq×K (the summed weight matrix). Then E[Tr | F r−1, L r ] = ¯W (p − η). Therefore (II) = Var ( ¯W (p − η) | F r−1) = ¯W Var (p | F r−1) ¯W ⊤. (78) Since p = Lr /G and Lr is drawn from the randomized rounding scheme, we bound Var (p) compo-nentwise. Under randomized rounding, Lr,j = ⌊Gη j ⌋ + 1{j ∈ S} where |S| = r0 := G − P 

> j

⌊Gη j ⌋ ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1} and P(j ∈ S) = Gη j − ⌊ Gη j ⌋ =: ρj ∈ [0 , 1). Since 1{j ∈ S} is a {0, 1}-valued random variable with mean ρj :

Var (Lr,j ) = Var (1{j ∈ S}) ≤ ρj (1 − ρj ) ≤ 14 .

Hence Var (pj ) = Var (Lr,j )/G 2 ≤ 1/(4 G2). Since the entries of p are not independent (they sum to 1), we use ∥Var (p)∥op ≤ tr( Var (p)) = P 

> j

Var (pj ) ≤ K/ (4 G2). Therefore, the trace norm of (II) satisfies: tr((II)) = tr   ¯W Var (p) ¯W ⊤ ≤ ∥ Var (p)∥op tr( ¯W ⊤ ¯W ) ≤ K

4G2 ∥ ¯W ∥2 

> F

.

Since ¯W = Pℓr 

> t=1

Wt and each column of Wt is ωa(Xr,t ) with ∥ωa∥ ≤ Cω ·diam( X )+ ∥ωa(x0)∥ =: Umax ,we have ∥ ¯W ∥2 

> F

≤ K ℓ 2 

> r

U 2max ≤ K G 2 U 2max .Combining: tr((II)) ≤ K2 U 2max  

> 4

. Per-tuple, summing over ≤ n/G tuples and normalizing by 1 /n :1

n

X

> r

tr((II) r ) ≤ 1

n · nG · K2U 2max 

4 = K2U 2max 

4G = O

 1

G



,

where the last step absorbs K into the constant (since K is treated as a fixed constant throughout). When K is explicitly tracked, the contribution is O(K2/G ) = O(K/G ) since K ≥ 2 implies K2 ≤

K · Kmax with Kmax bounded. ■70 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

G.4 Global Variance Bound G.4.1 Proof of the Global Variance Bound (Theorem 6) Strategy. The aggregate imbal-ance variance decomposes into three independent sources: (i) a within-bin Lipschitz approximation error, scaling as h2, which would vanish if balance functions were constant within each bin; (ii) a randomized-rounding contribution scaling as 1 /G , controlled by Appendix G.3; and (iii) a tail-tuple contribution from at most Mn incomplete tuples, scaling as MnG/n . Step 5 then balances all three sources by tuning h, G, and Mn as functions of the batch size m, yielding the rate 

∥Sb∥ = OP (m−1/(d+4) ) asserted in (25). Decomposing Sn across all tuples r = 1 , . . . , R n and using the martingale-difference property of tuple increments gives the global variance decomposition 

Var (Sn | X(n)) = 1

n

> Rn

X

> r=1

EVar (Tr | F r−1) | X(n) , (79) and we bound each of the three contributions to (79). Let nc denote the number of complete tuples (of length exactly G) and nt the number of tail tuples (of length < G ), with nt ≤ Mn (at most one per bin). Throughout, we use the assumed Lipschitz property of the balance functions, 

∥ωa(x) − ωa(x′)∥ ≤ Cω ∥x − x′∥2 ∀ a ∈ A , (80) and the bin-diameter bound diam( Bℓ) ≤ h ∀ ℓ = 1 , . . . , M n. (81) 

Step 1: Within-bin approximation (Lipschitz error)—the h2 term. For a complete tuple (ℓr = G) in bin Bℓ, fix a reference point xℓ ∈ Bℓ. Write ωa(Xr,t ) = ωa(xℓ) + δr,t,a where ∥δr,t,a ∥ ≤ Cω h

by the Lipschitz condition (80) and the bin diameter bound (81). 

Cancellation for constant features. If ωa(Xr,t ) ≡ ωa(xℓ) for all t (constant within the tuple), then 

Wt ≡ W0 (the common weight matrix with columns ωa(xℓ)). For a complete tuple ( ℓr = G), the variance formula (76) gives: 

Var (Tr | Lr ) = GG − 1 · G · W0Σ( p)W ⊤ 

> 0

− 1

G − 1 · G2 · W0Σ( p)W ⊤ 

> 0

= 0 .

The key insight: within a complete tuple, the without-replacement structure creates exact balance when all features are identical, because the negative cross-covariance −Σ( p)/(G − 1) perfectly offsets the marginal variance. 

Perturbation bound. Write Wt = W0 + ∆ t where ∆ t has columns δr,t,a . Expanding Var (Tr | Lr )using the formula (76): 

GG − 1

> G

X

> t=1

(W0 + ∆ t)Σ( p)( W0 + ∆ t)⊤ − 1

G − 1

X 

> t

(W0 + ∆ t)



Σ( p)

X 

> t

(W0 + ∆ t)

⊤

.Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 71 

The W0-only terms cancel (as shown above). The cross terms W0Σ( p)∆ ⊤ 

> t

also cancel after the same algebraic structure. The remaining terms are quadratic in ∆ t, each bounded by C C 2 

> ω

h2 ∥Σ( p)∥op in trace norm. Since ∥Σ( p)∥op ≤ 1 (as p lies on the simplex), the trace-norm contribution per complete tuple is at most C C 2 

> ω

h2 G.Summing over nc ≤ n/G complete tuples and normalizing by 1 /n :1

n

X

> r:complete

E[tr( Var (Tr | F r−1, L r )) | X(n)] ≤ 1

n · nG · C C 2 

> ω

h2 G = C C 2 

> ω

h2.

Step 2: Randomized rounding—the 1/G term. By the law of total variance (see Sec-tion G.3), each tuple contributes an additional rounding-variance term (II). For each complete tuple, tr((II) r ) ≤ Cround where Cround depends on ( K, U max ) (see (78) and the bound thereafter). Summing over ≤ n/G tuples: 1

n

X

> r:complete

tr((II) r ) ≤ 1

n · nG · Cround = Cround 

G = O

 1

G



.

When Gη a ∈ Z for all a (integer counts), the rounding randomness vanishes and this term is identically zero. 

Step 3: Tail tuples—the MnG/n term. Each bin Bℓ contributes at most one tail tuple (the last, possibly incomplete tuple). For a tail tuple of length ℓr ≤ G, we bound its variance directly from the formula (76). Each of the two terms in the formula involves at most ℓr ≤ G summands, each bounded by ∥Wt∥2 

> F

∥Σ( p)∥op ≤ K U 2max · 1 = K U 2max . Therefore tr( Var (Tr | Lr )) ≤ C′ G where 

C′ depends on ( K, U max ). Taking the full variance (including rounding): tr( Var (Tr | F r−1)) ≤ C′ G

by the same bound. There are at most Mn tail tuples. Summing and normalizing: 1

n

X

> r:tail

E[tr( Var (Tr | F r−1)) | X(n)] ≤ Mn · C′ · Gn = O

 Mn Gn



.

Step 4: Combine. Adding the three contributions (Steps 1–3): tr  Var (Sn | X(n)) ≤ C



h2 + 1

G + Mn Gn



, (82) where C depends only on ( Cω , K, q, U max ) and the propensity bounds. This is the asserted global balance bound (with K absorbed into C as a fixed constant). 

Step 5: From bound to rate—geometric tuning. The body theorem (25) asserts ∥Sb∥ =

OP (m−1/(d+4) ) for a batch of size m. To go from the bound (82) (with n replaced by m) to this rate, we minimize the right-hand side over ( h, G ) subject to Mn ≍ h−d, the standard packing bound for a compact d-dimensional X . With this constraint, 

h2 + 1

G + Mn Gm ≍ h2 + 1

G + Gm h d .72 Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 

The minimizer balances all three summands. Setting h2 = 1 /G gives G = h−2; substituting into the third summand and equating with the first yields h−2/(m h d) = h2, i.e., hd+4 ≍ 1/m , hence 

h ≍ m−1/(d+4) , G ≍ m2/(d+4) , Mn ≍ md/ (d+4) .

At this choice each of the three terms equals m−2/(d+4) , so tr  Var (Sb | X(m)) ≤ 3C m −2/(d+4) .

Since E∥Sb∥2 = tr( Var (Sb | X(m))) in expectation (martingale-difference structure removes the con-ditional mean) and ∥Sb∥2 is a non-negative random variable, Markov’s inequality gives ∥Sb∥ =

OP (m−1/(d+4) ) = oP (1), which is (25). ■

G.5 Semiparametric Efficiency G.5.1 Proof of Semiparametric Efficiency (Theorem 7) Strategy. We control the three terms of the structural decomposition (23) separately. The balancing remainder (Term III) is handled by the global variance bound (Theorem 6) applied within each batch and aggregated. The design gap (Term II) is handled by the design-regret bound (71) applied to the second-moment proxy rate from Assumption (CB5). The oracle-EIF term (Term I) is an i.i.d.-by-batch martingale sum that converges to N (0 , V ⋆) by the martingale CLT. Combining the three contributions gives the asserted MSE expansion V ⋆/n + o(1 /n ). We prove (27) by controlling the three terms of the decomposition (23). Throughout, B ≲ log n

and γb ≍ nb/B .

Step 1: Balancing remainder (Term (III)). By (23), the balancing remainder is (III) = 1

√n

> B

X

> b=1

X 

> i∈batch b

X

> a∈A

 1{Ai = a} − e(b) 

> a

(Xi) ωa(Xi)

| {z }  

> =: √γbS(b)
> γb

,

where S(b) 

> γb

is the moment imbalance within batch b with balance functions ωa. Since ωa is Lipschitz by (CB4), Corollary 6 with h ≍ γ−1/(d+4)  

> b

, G ≍ γ2/(d+4)  

> b

gives 

Var  S(b) 

> γb

| X(γb) = O



γ−2/(d+4) 

> b



.

Hence E∥S(b) 

> γb

∥2 = O(γ−2/(d+4)  

> b

), and the total squared balancing remainder satisfies 

E∥(III) ∥2 ≤ 1

n

> B

X

> b=1

γb E∥S(b) 

> γb

∥2 ≤ Cn

> B

X

> b=1

γ1−2/(d+4)  

> b

.

With geometric batches ( γb ≍ nb/B ), the dominant term is b = B (γB ≍ n): 

E∥(III) ∥2 ≤ C B n · n1−2/(d+4) = C B n −2/(d+4) = o(1) .Li et al.: Semiparametric Efficiency in Sequential Experiments: Characterization and Design via Average Propensity 73 

Therefore (III) = oP (1). 

Step 2: Design gap (Term (II)). Term (II) from (23) equals (II) = 1

√n

> B

X

> b=1

X 

> i∈batch b

φe(b) (Oi) − φe⋆ (Oi).

Its MSE contribution arises from the difference in EIF variances: 

E∥(II) ∥2 | H  = 1

n

> B

X

> b=1

γb

 Ve(b) − V ⋆ + (cross-batch terms) .

The cross-batch terms vanish since different batches use independent randomization conditional on their respective propensities. By Assumption (CB5) and Theorem 4, E[Ve(b) − V ⋆] = E[L(e(b)) −

L(e⋆)] ≤ C γ −2βb−1 for b ≥ 2. Therefore 1

n

> B

X

> b=1

γb

 E[Ve(b) ] − V ⋆ ≤ γ1

n

 Ve(1) − V ⋆ + Cn

> B

X

> b=2

γb γ−2βb−1 = o(1) ,

for any β > 0 with geometric batches. 

Step 3: Oracle EIF (Term (I)) and CLT. Write (I) = 1√n

Pni=1 φe⋆ (Oi). By the EIF structure (2), E[φe⋆ (Oi) | Xi] = g(Xi) − θ0, and conditional on ( Xi, A i), the IPW component va(Xi, Y i)/e ⋆a(Xi)has mean zero and bounded variance. The oracle EIF scores form a martingale difference array across batches. By the martingale CLT (with B ≲ log n): (I) = 1

√n

> n

X

> i=1

φe⋆ (Oi) d

−→ N (0 , V ⋆).

Step 4: Combine. From Steps 1–3, √n(ˆθn − θ0) equals the oracle EIF sum (converging to 

N (0 , V ⋆)) plus a design gap of MSE contribution o(1 /n ) plus a balancing remainder of MSE con-tribution o(1) (hence o(1 /n ) after dividing by n) plus oP (1). Therefore 

E[( ˆθn − θ0)2] = V ⋆

n + o

 1

n



.

■