Title: Probably Correct Optimal Stable Matching under Two-Sided Uncertainty

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.04824v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 03:08:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Probably Correct Optimal Stable Matching under Two-Sided Uncertainty 

Andreas Athanasopoulos 1 Anne-Marie George 2 Christos Dimitrakakis 11University of NeuchГўtel, NeuchГўtel, Switzerland 

> 2

University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 

## Abstract 

We study a sequential learning problem for sta-ble matchings in two-sided markets where pref-erences on both sides are initially unknown. We focus on a centralized setting where an algorithm matches agents at each time step and receives noisy rewards that reflect the preferences of the matched agents, following a semi-bandit feedback structure. We adopt a pure exploration perspective, aiming to efficiently identify the optimal stable matching with high probability. Our work extends prior re-sults by handling two-sided uncertainty and by exploiting partial preference information. A cen-tral ingredient is the notion of pervasive stable matching , which enables the identification of op-timal stable matchings under partial preferences. We propose elimination-based algorithms whose stopping criteria exploit the structure of the learned partial preferences, and provide a refined sample-complexity analysis. Beyond pure exploration, we extend our approach to regret minimization and establish regret bounds with respect to the opti-mal stable matching that avoid dependence on the minimum reward gap вҲҶmin .

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Two-sided matching markets model situations in which two distinct sets of agents aim to match with each other based on their preferences [Gusfield and Irving, 1989]. Classic examples include students applying to universities, work-ers matching with firms, and organ donors paired with pa-tients [Roth, 1984]. A fundamental solution concept in this setting is stable matching [Gale and Shapley, 1962], a no-tion of equilibrium in the market, where no pair of agents has an incentive to deviate from the proposed assignment. Classical models typically assume that preferences are known in advance. In contrast, modern applications such as ride-sharing systems and online labor markets motivate sequential learning formulations, where agentsвҖҷ preferences are initially unknown and must be learned over time through repeated interactions. A growing body of literature casts this learning scenario within the Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) framework, a direc-tion initiated by Das and Kamenica [2005]. In the central-ized version of the problem, a platform matches the agents and receives noisy feedback reflecting their underlying pref-erences. This setting creates an inherent tension between ex-ploration and exploitation: the platform must decide whether to exploit current estimates of a stable matching or continue exploring to learn the agentsвҖҷ preferences. The problem is typically studied within a regret-minimization framework. In this work, we instead adopt a pure exploration perspective, aiming to efficiently identify an optimal stable matching with high probability. 

1.1 RELATED WORK 

In their foundational work, Das and Kamenica introduce this learning problem and empirically evaluate the perfor-mance of MAB algorithms across several preference struc-tures. A follow-up by Liu et al. [2020] introduced the no-tions of Player-Optimal and Player-Pessimal stable regret. Focusing on a setting where only one side of the market has unknown preferences, they analyzed an Explore-Then-Commit algorithm, proving sublinear bounds for both regret notions. They also examined an Upper Confidence Bound approach, establishing sublinear bounds for Player-Pessimal stable regret; however, they proved an impossibility result for bounding Player-Optimal regret. Later studies closed this gap by achieving sublinear player-optimal stable regret [Sankararaman et al., 2021, Basu et al., 2021, Kong and Li, 2023], though they primarily focused on one-sided uncertainty and specific market structures. More recent studies have begun to consider settings where both 

> arXiv:2607.04824v1 [cs.LG] 6 Jul 2026

sides of the market have uncertain preferences [Pagare and Ghosh, 2024, Zhang and Fang, 2024]. However, these works employ Explore-Then-Commit type algorithms. In contrast, this work adopts a pure exploration framework that is more naturally suited to the analysis of such algorithms and en-ables refined results on regret with respect to the optimal 

stable matching. The pure exploration objective of identifying an optimal stable matching with high probability was introduced by Athanasopoulos et al. [2025], while the work of Hosseini et al. [2024] focuses on identifying any stable matching. Both of these studies propose elimination-based algorithms restricted to one-sided uncertainty. We extend this literature by tackling a two-sided learning environment, providing refined arguments for the analysis of elimination algorithms. A core component of our approach is utilizing the agentsвҖҷ 

partial preference rankings to identify an optimal stable matching, thereby circumventing the need to learn their full preference orderings. This approach is motivated by the con-cept of pervasive stable matching , introduced by Rastegari et al. [2014] to reason about optimal stable matchings under partial information in non-learning scenarios. Specifically, a partial preference profile of the agents admits a pervasive stable matching if that matching remains optimally stable under every possible full refinement of the given preferences. A closely related notion is that of a super stable matching ,initially introduced to address stability in instances with indifferent preferences [Irving, 1994]. While super stability was recently leveraged by Basu [2025] to bound regret in sequential learning scenarios, our work specifically relies on pervasive stable matchings. This distinction is crucial, as our objective is to identify the optimal stable matching, rather than any stable matching. Appendix A contains an extended review of related litera-ture, along with a comprehensive discussion on metrics. 

1.2 CONTRIBUTIONS 

In this work, we demonstrate how partial preferences and the concepts of pervasive stable matching can be applied in a learning scenario to identify the optimal stable matching with high probability under two-sided market uncertainty .Our specific contributions are structured as follows: вҖў Uniform Strategies: We present two variants of uni-form exploration strategies that assume additional in-formation about the reward structure. We show that rea-soning about partial preferences significantly reduces the overall sample complexity compared to approaches that learn the full rankings, thereby avoiding the tradi-tional dependence on the minimum reward gap. вҖў Elimination Algorithm & Technical Contribution: 

We propose an adaptive elimination algorithm that re-quires no prior knowledge of reward gaps, utilizing a stopping rule based on partial preferences. Further-more, we provide a refined complexity bound based on edge-coloring arguments on bipartite graphs. вҖў Extended Elimination Rule: We also present an exten-sion of the elimination algorithm that further eliminates pairs upon identifying a super stable matching. вҖў Regret Minimization: Beyond our primary objective of pure exploration, we propose a meta-algorithm for the regret minimization setting. To the best of our knowledge, this provides the first regret bound with respect to the optimal stable matching under two-sided uncertainty that avoids a dependence on the minimum reward gap вҲҶmin .вҖў Theoretical Lower Bounds: Finally, we conclude our analysis by establishing a lower bound on the sample complexity, utilizing known results from the combina-torial MAB literature [Jourdan et al., 2021]. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion 2 introduces the necessary notation and background regarding the stable matching problem and partial prefer-ences. Section 3 then formally defines our learning problem and explains how we utilize the concept of pervasive sta-ble matching. In Section 4, we analyze uniform sampling strategies, discussing the impact of utilizing partial prefer-ences. Section 5 presents our elimination-based algorithm, followed by an extension of the elimination procedure and a discussion on a meta-algorithm for the regret minimization setting. Next, Section 6 establishes a lower bound on the sample complexity. In Section 7, we evaluate our algorithms through simulation on random instances. Further discussion and omitted proofs are provided in the Appendix. 

## 2 BACKGROUND 

We consider a learning problem in a two-sided matching market, consisting of two distinct, non-empty sets of agents, 

P and A, with K = |P| and N = |A| denoting the number of agents on each side, with arbitrary K, N 1.The agents A = P вҲӘ A are matched one-to-one according to a matching M вҠҶ P Г—A , i.e., pairs in M are pairwise disjoint. For convenience, we use the functional representation of a matching, where m(p) = a and m(a) = p for every 

(p, a ) вҲҲ M, and m(a) = вҠҘ for any unmatched agent a вҲҲ

A. We define OS (a) as the opposite side of agent a, i.e., 

OS (a) = A if a вҲҲ P , and OS (a) = P if a вҲҲ A .Each agent a вҲҲ A has an underlying true preference over the agents on the opposite side, represented by a strict preference ranking Fa. These preferences are de-rived from utility functions Ојa : OS (a) вҲӘ {вҠҘ} вҶ’ R,    

> 1Prior work usually assume KвүӨN[Liu et al., 2021, Basu, 2025, Kong and Li, 2023, Athanasopoulos et al., 2025].

where Ојa,m(a) denotes the utility that agent a obtains when matched with m(a) вҲҲ OS (a) , and Ојa,вҠҘ is the util-ity of being unmatched. We assume that for every agent 

a вҲҲ A, the utility values {Ојa,i }iвҲҲOS (a) вҲӘ{вҠҘ} are distinct, thereby ensuring no ties in preferences. The preference rank-ing is then uniquely constructed by sorting these utilities: 

Fa = arg sort iвҲҲOS (a) вҲӘ{вҠҘ} Ојa,i . We denote by вү»Fa the cor-responding strict order relation over OS (a) вҲӘ {вҠҘ} , where 

i вү»Fa j if and only if Ојa,i > Ој a,j for i, j вҲҲ OS (a) вҲӘ {вҠҘ} 

In order for a matching m to align with the agentsвҖҷ prefer-ences, Gale and Shapley [1962] introduced the concept of stable matching, a notion of equilibrium in which no two agents have an incentive to deviate. Formally: 

Definition 2.1 (Stable Matching) . A matching m is stable under the true preference profile {Fa}aвҲҲA if: 1. Individual rationality: For every agent a вҲҲ A, it holds that m(a) вӘ°Fa вҠҘ.2. No blocking pairs: There exists no pair (p, a ) вҲҲ P Г—A 

such that agent p prefers a over m(p) and agent a

prefers p over m(a), i.e., a вү»Fp m(p) and p вү»Fa m(a).Gale and Shapley [1962] proved that the set of stable matchings S is always non-empty by introducing the GaleвҖ“Shapley (GS) algorithm, which is based on sequential proposals from one side of the market to the other. The algo-rithm returns the (unique) optimal stable matching mвӢҶ for the proposing side, in the sense that every proposer receives the best partner they can obtain in any stable matching. Conversely, the resulting matching is pessimal for the side receiving the proposals, providing each agent on that side with their least-preferred partner among all stable matchings. In the remainder of the paper we concentrate on P-optimal stable matchings mвӢҶ, simply referred to as optimal .

2.1 STABLE MATCHING FROM PARTIAL PREFERENCES 

If we correctly estimate the full preference rankings of the agents, we can identify the optimal stable matching using the GS algorithm. However, learning the complete preference orders is not necessary: the optimal stable matching can be identified using only a correct partial preference order, as described by Rastegari et al. [2014]. Stable matchings under certain types of partial preferences form the basis of our proposed algorithms. We begin with the definition of a partial ranking. 

Definition 2.2 (Partial ranking) . A partial ranking Pa of an agent a вҲҲ A over the set of agents OS (a) is a par-tial order вү»Pa , i.e., asymmetric and transitive, that can be represented as directed acyclic graph (DAG) with edges 

(i, j ) вҠҶ OS (a) Г— OS (a) for all iМё = j with i вү»Pa j (mean-ing iМё вӘҜPa j). Note that all partial rankings are asymmetric and transitive, and that a full ranking is a special case of a partial ranking. 

Definition 2.3 (Full ranking) . A full ranking Fa of an agent 

a over the set of agents OS (a) is a partial ranking such that, for every distinct pair (i, j ) вҲҲ OS (a) Г— OS (a), either 

i вү»Fa j or j вү»Fa i.We now define when a partial ranking Pa is compatible with 

P вҖІ

> a

, in the sense that P вҖІ 

> a

is a refinement of Pa.

Definition 2.4 (Compatible Partial Rankings) . A partial ranking Pa is said to be compatible with another partial ranking P вҖІ

> a

, denoted by Pa 7 вҶ’ P вҖІ

> a

, if for any i, j вҲҲ OS (a)

such that i вү»P вҖІ 

> a

j, it is not the case that j вү»Pa i. We overload this definition to partial preference profiles PA =

{Pa}aвҲҲA and P вҖІ 

> A

= {P вҖІ

> a

}aвҲҲA of the agents, writing PA 7 вҶ’

P вҖІ 

> A

if Pa 7 вҶ’ P вҖІ 

> a

for all a вҲҲ A.Given a partial preference profile PA, we can describe the set of full ranking profiles FA = {Fa}aвҲҲA that refine PA

as F(PA) = {FA | PA 7 вҶ’ FA}. This motivates the follow-ing definition of a super stable matching [Irving, 1994], a concept originally proposed for preferences with indiffer-ences: we say that a matching m is super stable w.r.t. the preference profile PA if it is stable w.r.t. every full ranking profile FA вҲҲ F (PA).The work of Rastegari et al. [2014] introduce a similar defi-nition of pervasive stable matching (PSM), for a matching that is stable and optimal with respect to every full refine-ment of the partial preferences FA вҲҲ F (PA).

Definition 2.5 (Pervasive Stable Matching) . We say that a matching m is a pervasive stable matching for the preference profile PA if m is the optimal stable matching for every full ranking profile FA вҲҲ F (PA). We also say that PA admits a pervasive stable matching if such a matching exists. Previous work shows that the set of super stable matchings may be empty, and whenever it is non-empty, it forms a distributive lattice [Spieker, 1995]. In this case, there exists a unique optimal super stable matching for each side. In the following example we highlight that an optimal super stable matching is not necessarily the same as the pervasive stable matching [Rastegari et al., 2014]. 

Example 1. Consider an instance with two agents on each side, P = {p1, p 2} and A = {a1, a 2}, respectively. We assume that the agents in A have correctly estimated their preferences, while agents in P have no knowledge about their preferences yet, i.e. Pp = вҲ… вҲҖp вҲҲ P , making them indifferent between a1 and a2, denoted by a1 вҲј a2:

p1 p2 a1 a2

a1 вҲј a2 a1 вҲј a2 p1 вү» p2 p2 вү» p1In this setting, there are four possible full ranking profiles in 

F({Pa}aвҲҲA) that can refine the partial preferences of the agents in P that we illustrate in the next table. Instance p1 p2 a1 a2

I1 a1 вү» a2 a1 вү» a2 p1 вү» p2 p2 вү» p1

I2 a1 вү» a2 a2 вү» a1 p1 вү» p2 p2 вү» p1

I3 a2 вү» a1 a1 вү» a2 p1 вү» p2 p2 вү» p1

I4 a2 вү» a1 a2 вү» a1 p1 вү» p2 p2 вү» p1

The only super stable matching, and thus the optimal, is 

M = {(p1, a 1), (p2, a 2)} as the matching is stable with respect to every possible profile Ij with j = 1 , . . . , 4.Note that M , is not a pervasive stable matching, as for I3

the optimal stable matching is {(p1, a 2), (p2, a 1)}.If p1 collects more samples to decide that a1 вү» a2, then M

is PSM, as it is the optimal stable for both I1 and I2.

## 3 LEARNING PROBLEM 

We consider a learning problem where agents are initially unaware of their preferences and must learn them through repeated interactions. We focus on the centralized setting, where an algorithm selects a matching at each time step and observes stochastic rewards for the matched pairs 2.More formally, the algorithm interacts with an instance 

ОҪ = {ОҪa,i }(a,i )вҲҲPГ—A вҲҲ I , where each ОҪa,i corresponds to the reward distribution of agent a вҲҲ A when matched with agent i вҲҲ OS (a), and has mean Ојa,i = EXвҲјОҪa,i [X].

Assumption 1 (1-sub-Gaussian) . For every agent a вҲҲ A and 

i вҲҲ OS (a) , the reward distribution ОҪa,i is 1-sub-Gaussian. At each time step t вүҘ 1, the algorithm selects a match-ing mt вҲҲ M out of the set of all matchings M, and ob-serves stochastic rewards Xa,m t(a) вҲј ОҪa,m t(a) for each matched pair (a, m t(a)) for all a вҲҲ A. Specifically, the feedback at time t is represented by the vector Xt =(Xa,m t(a)I{a вҲҲ mt(a)})aвҲҲA вҲҲ RKГ—N . The filtration 

Ft := Пғ(m1, X 1, . . . , m t, X t) contains all the information available at step t + 1 , where Пғ(В·) denotes the Пғ-algebra generated by its arguments. The algorithm is defined by: 1. A Sampling Rule : A rule determining which matching to sample at each step t, formally a sequence (mt)tвҲҲN

where each mt is FtвҲ’1-measurable. 2. A Stopping Rule : A stopping time П„ with respect to the filtration (Ft)tвҲҲN, which determines when the ex-ploration phase ends. 

> 2Equivalently, we can assume that agents receive the rewards and truthfully report them to the algorithm.

3. A Recommendation Rule : An FП„ -measurable rule that selects a final matching mП„ to be returned upon termination. We consider the fixed-confidence setting, where the objec-tive is to design an algorithm that terminates and outputs the correct optimal stable matching with high probability. 

Definition 3.1 (Probably Correct Optimal Stable-matching) .

Given a fixed confidence parameter Оҙ вҲҲ (0 , 1) , an algorithm is said to be Оҙ-PCOS for every ОҪ вҲҲ E M if it terminates after 

П„ < вҲһ steps and returns the optimal stable matching mвӢҶОҪ

with high probability: 

PОҪ (mП„ = mвӢҶОҪ ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. 

Remark 3.2 . Beyond the probability of correctness, we are also interested in providing guarantees for the stopping time 

П„ , which represents the total number of matchings sampled before termination. We refer to the expected number of steps 

E[П„ ] as the sample complexity of the algorithm. 

Learning with Partial Preferences. Our previous discus-sion in Section 2.1 indicates that an algorithm only needs to learn a valid partial preference profile PA that admits a pervasive stable matching. This insight motivates the design of our algorithms in the subsequent sections. 

Definition 3.3 (Valid Preferences) . We say that a partial preference profile PA is valid for the full ranking profile FA

of an instance ОҪ if: 1. PA is compatible with FA, i.e., PA 7 вҶ’ FA, and 2. PA admits a pervasive stable matching. We denote the set of valid preference profiles by Pvalid (F ОҪA),which is never empty as it always contains the true profile 

FA. While the work of Rastegari et al. [2013] proves that identifying the set of valid preference profiles is NP-hard, their follow-up research provides a polynomial-time algo-rithm to return the pervasive stable matching whenever it exists, given a partial ranking [Rastegari et al., 2014]. To analyze the sample complexity of our algorithms, we introduce an admissible gap вҲҶF associated with an instance and the set of valid partial preference profiles Pvalid (F ОҪA).We define the minimum gap induced by a partial ranking Pa

as вҲҶmin (Pa) = min (i,j )вҲҲPa |Ојa,i вҲ’ Ојa,j |. Thus вҲҶmin (Pa)

indicates how hard it is for agent a to learn their pref-erence between pair (i, j ) вҲҲ Pa in the worst case. For a preference profile PA = {Pa}aвҲҲA, we extend this to 

вҲҶmin (PA) = min aвҲҲA вҲҶmin (Pa). Finally, the admissible gap of an instance is defined as the maximum such mini-mum gaps over all valid profiles, i.e., 

вҲҶF = max   

> PAвҲҲP valid (FОҪA)

вҲҶmin (PA). (1) Relation to the minimum gap: Previous work typically characterizes the performance of an algorithm in terms of the minimum reward gap вҲҶmin = min aвҲҲA вҲҶmin (Fa) [Liu et al., 2020]. In contrast, our admissible gap вҲҶF , defined with respect to the minimum valid partial profile, satisfies 

вҲҶF вүҘ вҲҶmin by definition. 

## 4 UNIFORM STRATEGIES 

Our first contribution using partial preferences is the analy-sis of a uniform strategy that samples matchings covering all possible pairs P Г— A uniformly for a fixed number of h

exploration rounds. We analyze this algorithm for two cases, where the number of exploration rounds h uses вҲҶmin or 

вҲҶF , to ensure the identification of the correct optimal stable matching with high probability. After uniformly sampling pairs in P Г— A for h rounds, Al-gorithm 1 commits to a matching by executing GS on the es-timated preferences, mП„ = GS ({ ЛҶFa}aвҲҲA). Here the prefer-ence ranking for an agent a вҲҲ A is determined by sorting the empirical mean rewards, i.e., ЛҶFa = arg sort iвҲҲOS (a) ЛҶОјa,i (t),where ЛҶОјa,i (t) = 1

> Na,i (t)

Pts=1 I(ms(a) = i)Xa,i (s) and 

Na,i (t) denotes the number of times the pair (a , i ) has been sampled up to time t.

Sampling from Minimal Matching Covers: To sample all pairs in a set X вҠҶ P Г— A , we sample matchings from a minimal matching cover M(X) вҖ” the smallest set of match-ings such that X вҠҶ S 

> mвҲҲM(X)

m. For a bipartite graph, finding this cover is equivalent to a minimum edge coloring problem, where the edges of each color correspond to a matching in the cover [Gabow and Kariv, 1978]. According to KЛқ onigвҖҷs Theorem, the minimal number of matchings in a cover is equal to the maximum degree deg (G(X)) of the bipartite graph G(X) with edges X. Thus, in our setting, a full exploration of all pairs P Г— A requires max {K, N }

matchings in each exploration round h. Sampling from a matching cover is essential for our later elimination algo-rithms, where only a specific subset of pairs needs to be sampled in each step. It relaxes the requirement for round-robin strategies and extends the analysis beyond the usual assumption of N < K .We can now bound the sample complexity of the uniform strategy where the number of exploration rounds is defined as a function of вҲҶmin . This algorithm samples pairs until all agents complete preference rankings can be determined. 

Theorem 4.1. Algorithm 1 with parameter h =

вҢҲ 8 ln(2 KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2min 

вҢү is a Оҙ-PCOS algorithm, and the number of sampled matchings is bounded by: 

O



max {K, N } ln( KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2min 



.

Next, we introduce a variant where h depends on вҲҶF . In this 

Algorithm 1 Uniform Exploration 

Require: h, P, A, n = max {|P| , |A|} 

1: Compute a minimal matching cover 

{mi}ni=1 = M({(p, a ) вҲҲ P Г— A} )

2: for t in {1, В· В· В· , h В· n} do 

3: Sample mi+1 where i = ( t вҲ’ 1) mod n.

4: Update ЛҶОјa, mi+1 (a)(t) вҲҖa вҲҲ A

5: end for 

6: ЛҶFa = arg sort iвҲҲOS (a) ЛҶОјa,i вҲҖa вҲҲ A

7: return mП„ = GS ({ ЛҶFa}aвҲҲA)

version, the algorithm samples each pair often enough to cor-rectly identify a valid preference profile PA вҲҲ P valid (F ОҪA),with вҲҶF = max PAвҲҲP valid (F ОҪA) вҲҶmin (PA).

Theorem 4.2. Algorithm 1 with parameter h =

вҢҲ 8 ln(2 KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2

> F

вҢү is a Оҙ-PCOS algorithm, and the number of sampled matchings is bounded by: 

O



max {K, N } ln( KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2

> F



.

Remark 4.3 . Note that by construction вҲҶmin вүӨ вҲҶF , which can lead to an arbitrarily large increase in sample complex-ity, as illustrated in Example 2 and Figure 1. While knowing either gap, вҲҶmin or вҲҶF , might not be possible in practice, knowing вҲҶF seems to be an even more unrealistic assump-tion, as computing the set of valid preference profiles is computationally hard [Rakhlin and Sridharan, 2013]. 

Example 2. Consider an instance with two agents on each side, with the following true preference rankings: 

p1 p2 a1 a2

a1 вү» a2 a1 вү» a2 p1 вү» p2 p1 вү» p2

For this instance, the partial preference profile PA =

{Pp1 = {a1 вү» a2}, P p2 = вҲ…, P a1 = {p1 вү» p2}, P a2 = вҲ…} 

is valid, i.e., the algorithm does not need to estimate the pref-erences of p2 and a2. So the difficulty of the learning task does not depend on the gaps associated with these agents. To illustrate, consider the following mean rewards: Agent Mean rewards Ојp1 Ојp1,a 1 = 1 Ојp1,a 2 = 1 вҲ’ вҲҶF

a1 Ојa1,p 1 = 1 Ојa1,p 2 = 1 вҲ’ вҲҶF

p2 Ојp2,a 1 = 1 Ојp2,a 2 = 1 вҲ’ вҲҶmin 

a2 Ојa2,p 1 = 1 Ојa2,p 2 = 1 вҲ’ вҲҶmin 

Figure 1 fixes вҲҶF = 0 .5 and varies вҲҶmin , comparing the sample complexity of the algorithms with exploration time 

h defined in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, and shows that the resulting differences in the sample complexities can become arbitrarily large as вҲҶmin goes to zero. Figure 1: Sample complexity bounds from Theorem 4.1 and 4.2 for Example 2вҖҷs instance with fixed вҲҶmin < вҲҶF = 0 .5.

## 5 ELIMINATION ALGORITHM 

We now turn our attention to elimination algorithms: these have improved sample complexity and do not require prior knowledge of gaps вҲҶ.

5.1 SIMPLE ELIMINATION ALGORITHM 

The key idea of Algorithm 2 is to (i) update partial prefer-ences once pairwise orderings are inferred with high proba-bility, (ii) eliminate pairs from sampling, and (iii) stop when a PSM is found. High-probability correctness of the partial preferences implies identification of the optimal matching 

mвӢҶ with high probability. 

Sampling: The elimination algorithm operates in rounds 

t and keeps track of active (non-eliminated) agents Sa(t) вҠҶ

OS (a) вҖ“ those for which the relative ordering in aвҖҷs prefer-ences is not determined with high probability yet. We ini-tialise Sa(0) = OS (a) for all agents a вҲҲ A. Then in each round t, we sample the matchings from a minimal matching cover M(St), where St is the set of all non-eliminated pairs: 

St = {(p, a ) вҲҲ P Г— A | a вҲҲ Sp(t) вҲЁ p вҲҲ Sa(t)}

So at each round t, we sample nt matchings, with nt defined as the maximum degree of the underling graph of the non-eliminated pairs G(St), i.e., nt = deg (G(St)) .

Partial Preferences: To eliminate pairs and form the par-tial preferences of the agents, we employ confidence inter-vals. Specifically, at each round t, every agent a вҲҲ A main-tains a confidence interval for the mean reward associated with each agent i вҲҲ OS (a). The corresponding confidence radius is defined as: 

ca,i (t) = 

r 2 ln (8 KN t 2/Оҙ )

t . (2) 

Algorithm 2 E-PSM: Elimination PSM 

Require: Оҙ, P, A 

> 1:

Sa вҶҗ OS (a) вҲҖa вҲҲ A в–· Active pairs  

> 2:

Pa вҶҗ вҲ… вҲҖa вҲҲ A в–· Partial ranking  

> 3:

mП„ = P OSM ({Pa}aвҲҲA) 

> 4:

while mП„ = NONE вҲ§ S 

> aвҲҲA

SaМё = вҲ… do  

> 5:

St вҶҗ { (p, a ) вҲҲ P Г— A | a вҲҲ Sp(t) вҲЁ p вҲҲ Sa(t)} 

> 6:

for m вҲҲ M(St) do  

> 7:

Sample update ЛҶОјa,m (a) вҲҖa вҲҲ A 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Update ca,i (t) вҲҖa вҲҲ A, i вҲҲ OS (a) в–· Eq. 2  

> 10:

Update Pa вҲҖa вҲҲ A в–· Eq. 5  

> 11:

Eliminate pairs in Sa в–· Eq. 6  

> 12:

mП„ = P OSM ({Pa}aвҲҲA) 

> 13:

end while  

> 14:

return mП„

Using this radius, we define the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) and Lower Confidence Bound (LCB) as: 

UCB a,i (t) = ЛҶ Ојa,i (t) + ca,i (t), (3) 

LCB a,i (t) = ЛҶ Ојa,i (t) вҲ’ ca,i (t). (4) We construct the partial ranking Pa by adding a directed edge from i to j for any distinct pair i, j вҲҲ OS (a) whenever the confidence intervals are disjoint. Formally, at round t,we update the edge set of Pa according to: 

Pa вҶҗ Pa вҲӘ { (i, j )} if LCB a,i (t) > UCB a,j (t). (5) 

Elimination Rule: We remove an agent i from a set of active agents Sa if iвҖҷs confidence interval is strictly disjoint from that of every other active agent j вҲҲ Sa \ { i}. Formally, we update Sa вҶҗ Sa \ { i} if вҲҖj вҲҲ Sa \ { i}:

LCB a,i (t) > UCB a,j (t) вҲЁ UCB a,i (t) < LCB a,j (t). (6) This implies that the relative order between i and every other active agent j has been established with high probability, rendering further sampling of i unnecessary for agent a.

Stopping Condition: We stop sampling either when all available pairs have been eliminated or when the agentsвҖҷ partial preference profile admits a PSM. By construction, the partial preferences are consistent with the true underlying preferences with high probability; thus, the matching is the optimal stable matching with high probability. To compute a PSM, we use the POSM algorithm [Rastegari et al., 2014] (line 3 of Algorithm 2) , which returns a PSM for the given partial preference profile if one exists, and N ONE otherwise, in polynomial time. To analyse the sample complexity of Algorithm 2, we de-fine the following reward gaps: For an agent a вҲҲ A and 

i вҲҲ OS (a). Let вҲҶa,i = min jвҲҲOS (a)\{ i} |Ојa,i вҲ’ Ојa,j |denote the minimum reward gap separating i from all other candidates, and define вҲҶmin  

> a,i

= min {вҲҶa,i , вҲҶi,a } and 

вҲҶFa,i = max(вҲҶ F , вҲҶmin  

> a,i

).

Theorem 5.1. Algorithm 2 is a Оҙ-PCOS algorithm, and the number of sampled matchings is bounded by: 

O

пЈ«пЈӯmax 

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

32 log(8 KN/ (ОҙвҲҶFa,i )) (вҲҶ Fa,i )2

пЈ¶пЈё .

5.2 REGRET ANALYSIS 

As previously discussed, almost all results bounding regret w.r.t. the optimal stable matching are based on the ETC framework. More specifically, in our setting we can employ an meta-algorithm that runs the E-PSM algorithm (Algo-rithm 2) during the exploration phase, and subsequently commits to the identified matching for all remaining rounds. We provide a bound for the following notion of regret: 

R(T ) = 

> T

X

> t=1

I{mtМё = mвҲ—}. (7) Basu [2025] uses a similar binary regret for a matching to be stable. In addition, our metric upper-bounds the player-optimal stable regret defined by Liu et al. [2020], a metric that reflects market stability only when it is sublinear for every agent in the market. 

Theorem 5.2. The E-PSM meta-algorithm with horizon T

and Оҙ = 1 /T has an expected regret E[R(T )] bounded by: 

O

пЈ«пЈӯmin 

пЈұпЈІпЈіT, max 

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

32 log(8 KN T / вҲҶFa,i )(вҲҶ Fa,i )2

пЈјпЈҪпЈҫпЈ¶пЈё .

Note that this minimum over the horizon cannot be avoided by any algorithm employing the Explore-Then-Commit framework. To our knowledge, this is the first regret bound with respect to the optimal stable matching under two-sided uncertainty that avoids a dependence on вҲҶmin .

5.3 EXTENDED ELIMINATION RULE 

We now present an extended version of our previous al-gorithm, which further eliminates pairs upon the identifi-cation of a super stable matching (see Algorithm 3 in the Appendix). Specifically, if at some time step the partial pref-erence profile {Pa}aвҲҲA admits a super stable matching mss ,we use the following elimination rule: 

Sp вҶҗ Sp \ { a} if mss (p) вү»Pp a вҲҖ p вҲҲ P .Sa вҶҗ Sa \ { p} if p вү»Pa mss (a) вҲҖ a вҲҲ A .

To show that this elimination still allows the identification of a valid profile, and thus a pervasive stable matching, we first show that one specific profile dependant on the optimal stable matching is always valid. 

Proposition 5.3. Let F вҲ— be a full ranking profile for agents 

A = P вҲӘ A with P-optimal stable matching mвҲ—. Then the following partial profile P is a valid profile for F вҲ—:

вҖў вҲҖp вҲҲ P ,P p = {(a, a вҖІ) вҲҲ A Г— A | a вү» aвҖІ вӘ°F вҲ— 

> p

mвҲ—(p)}вҲӘ { (a, a вҖІ) вҲҲ A Г— A | a вӘ°F вҲ— 

> p

mвҲ—(p) вү»F вҲ— 

> p

aвҖІ}

вҖў вҲҖa вҲҲ A ,P a = {(p, p вҖІ) вҲҲ A Г— A | pвҖІ вүә p вӘҜF вҲ— 

> a

mвҲ—(a)}вҲӘ { (p, p вҖІ) вҲҲ A Г— A | p вӘҜF вҲ— 

> a

mвҲ—(a) вүәF вҲ— 

> a

pвҖІ}

Now any partial profile compatible with profile P as speci-fied in Proposition 5.3 is again a valid profile. In particular, for a partial profile P вҖІ = {P вҖІ

> a

}aвҲҲA that is compatible with full ranking profile F , P вҲ— = P вҲӘ P вҖІ = {Pa вҲӘ P вҖІ

> a

}aвҲҲA is a valid profile. Assume that P вҖІ admits a super stable matching 

m that is not the PSM. Then P вҲ— does not contain: вҖў a вү»P вҲ— 

> p

aвҖІ for a, a вҖІ вҲҲ A and p вҲҲ P with m(p) вү»Fp

a, a вҖІ, unless a вү»P вҖІ 

> p

aвҖІ:For optimal stable matching mвҲ— in F , we have 

mвҲ—(p) вү»Fp m(p) вү»Fp a, a вҖІ. Thus (a, a вҖІ) /вҲҲ Pp.вҖў p вүәP вҲ— 

> a

pвҖІ for p, p вҖІ вҲҲ P and a вҲҲ A with m(a) вүәFa

p, p вҖІ, unless p вүәP вҖІ 

> a

pвҖІ:We have mвҲ—(a) вүәFa m(a) вүәFa p, p вҖІ and thus 

(p, p вҖІ) /вҲҲ Pa.As these relations are not known in P вҲ—, and P вҲ— is valid, we can eliminate agents as described above. Note that just because Proposition 5.3 guarantees that a valid profile (specifically P вҲ—) can still be identified after eliminating agents form active pairs, this does not mean that the valid profiles that are still learnable attain the best-case gap вҲҶFa,i = max(вҲҶ F , вҲҶmin  

> a,i

). We can therefore not transfer the sample complexity bound from Theorem 5.1. However, a super stable matching might be identifiable very fast, lead-ing to early elimination of pairs and hence decreased sample complexity. We explore the sample complexity in our ex-periments to identify whether this trade-off between early elimination and restriction to valid profiles is beneficial. 

## 6 LOWER BOUND 

We now establish a non-explicit lower bound on sample complexity by adapting the analysis of Jourdan et al. [2021]. For an instance ОҪ вҲҲ I , we denote with mвӢҶОҪ the optimal stable matching. To provide a lower bounds on the sample complexity, we define the set of alternative environments 

Ialt (ОҪ) as the collection of all environments in I where the optimal stable matching is different from that in ОҪ:

Ialt (ОҪ) = {ОҪвҖІ вҲҲ I : mвӢҶОҪвҖІМё = mвӢҶОҪ } (8) Now we can define the transformed simplex S|M| =

{P 

> mвҲҲM

Imwm : wm вҲҲ вҲҶM} вҠӮ RPГ—A , where Im вҠӮ{0, 1}PГ—A represents the binary indicator vector of active pairs in matching m, and wm вҲҲ вҲҶM denotes the proportion of rounds in which that specific matching is sampled. 

Theorem 6.1. For any Оҙ-PACOS algorithm and any match-ing instance ОҪ,

EОҪ [П„ ] вүҘ ln 12.4Оҙ cвҲ’1 

> вӢҶ

(ОҪ) (9) 

where cвӢҶ(ОҪ) is the solution of the optimization problem: 

cвӢҶ(ОҪ) = sup 

> wвҲҲS |M|

inf 

> ОҪвҖІвҲҲAlt (ОҪ)

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

wa,i KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

).

Although the bound is not explicit, it characterizes the intrin-sic difficulty of the problem. In the MAB literature, this type of lower bound typically guides the design of optimal algo-rithms Degenne et al. [2019]. However, because solving the associated optimization problem is computationally hard, standard Track-and-Stop methods Garivier and Kaufmann [2016] cannot be directly adapted. Developing efficient ap-proximations, such as adapting the methods of Jourdan et al. [2021], is an interesting direction that remains open. To provide a more concrete analysis, we establish an explicit lower bound for instances with global preferences in Ap-pendix G, similar to the approach of Kaufmann et al. [2016], using arguments based on minimum valid preference profile. 

## 7 SIMULATIONS 

In this section, we present simulations to empirically evalu-ate the proposed algorithms on random instances for varying market sizes n, fixing n = N = K agents on each side. The code to reproduce the presented results is provided online 3.

Settings: We perform two sets of experiments, covering both pure exploration and regret minimization, which we present in the following subsections. 

Instances: To generate instances, we first construct the agentsвҖҷ preferences using random perturbations. We then assign the rewards for each agent a вҲҲ A by sampling the reward gaps вҲҶa,i,i +1 between consecutive agents from a uni-form distribution over [вҲҶ min , 1] , where we set вҲҶmin = 0 .2.

Algorithms: To isolate the individual effects of the elimina-tion strategy and the PSM-based stopping rule, we compare: 1. U-вҲҶ: The uniform sampling strategy of Section 4 with known вҲҶmin .2. U: Uniform sampling of all pairs, stopping only when all confidence intervals separate (without вҲҶmin knowledge). 3. U-PSM: Uniform sampling of all pairs, terminating when a pervasive stable matching is identified. 4. E-NS: The elimination algorithm without stopping rule, terminating only once all pairs are eliminated. 

> 3https://github.com/a-athanasopoulos/ Probably-Correct-Optimal-Stable-Matching

Figure 2: Sample complexity as a function of market size n.5. E-PSM: The elimination algorithm of Section 5, termi-nating when a pervasive stable matching is identified. 6. EE-PSM (Extended PSM): The extended elimination algorithm that further eliminates pairs after identifying a super stable matching as discussed in Section 5.3. 

7.1 PURE EXPLORATION 

In Figure 2, we illustrate the sample complexity of the differ-ent approaches, averaged over 100 random instances, along with their standard deviations. For these experiments, we set the confidence parameter to Оҙ = 0 .1. Notably, all algo-rithms successfully identified the optimal stable matching in every run; this empirical correctness aligns with standard observations in the MAB literature [Jamieson et al., 2014]. Regarding sample complexity, we observe that the proposed algorithms, E-PSM and EE-PSM , significantly outperform all other baselines. Interestingly, we observe only a slight performance difference between these two specific algo-rithms on random instances. More specifically, upon further examining their behavior, we found that although the ex-tended algorithm eliminated a large number of pairs, the size of the minimum matching cover did not decrease sig-nificantly, leading to near-identical sample complexities. Finally, the results demonstrate clear, independent benefits from both the elimination strategy and the early stopping rule. For example, comparing U-PSM to E-PSM isolates the positive effect of pair elimination, while comparing E-NS 

to E-PSM highlights the drastic impact of the stopping rule. Furthermore, E-NS outperforms U-PSM in n = 20 , demon-strating that the effect of the elimination rule is relatively larger on average as the market grows. To conclude, the re-sults show that U-PSM exhibits larger variability across the random instances, suggesting a high sensitivity to specific reward structures. In contrast, the effect of the elimination rule in E-NS is much more stable. Appendix H presents a similar experiment with different Figure 3: Cumulative regret numbers of agents on each side, further demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach. 

7.2 REGRET MINIMIZATION 

We further provide an ablation study for regret minimization. We measure regret using the cumulative market instability defined in Section 5.2, Eq. 7, which counts the number of rounds in which the selected matching differs from the optimal stable matching [Das and Kamenica, 2005, Basu, 2025]. To clearly demonstrate the performance of our method against existing benchmarks, we focus on the more exten-sively studied one-sided uncertainty setting. This allows us to compare with prior regret-minimization algorithms, while our method naturally applies to the two-sided uncertainty setting considered in this paper. 

Additional benchmark: We specifically compare our ap-proach with AETGSE, the algorithm of Kong and Li [2024], which combines adaptive elimination with the logic of GS algorithm. In the centralized setting, agents explore their currently valid partners in a coordinated round-robin man-ner, eliminating partners that are certified to be suboptimal. Once an agent identifies its most preferred valid partner, it stop exploring and temporarily commits to it. If this partner becomes unavailable (due to a higher-priority agent), the agent restarts the exploration process. Figure 3 presents the results over 50 independent experi-ments for each algorithm, using random market instances with the number of agents on each side fixed to K = N =20 . The results show that our elimination-based approach with a stopping rule based on pervasive stable matching (E-PSM) achieves lower regret in this one-sided uncertainty setting. Moreover, the uniform-sampling approach (U-PSM) interpolates between AETGS-E and E-PSM, suggesting that both the elimination procedure and our stopping rule con-tribute to improved learning performance. Beyond the experimental comparison, our theoretical result yields a tighter upper bound than the analysis of AETGS-E, since the relevant gap depends on the minimum valid par-tial profile (see Section 3). Nevertheless, we highlight that AETGS-E may perform better on specific instances where agents do not need to restart exploration, due to its adaptive sampling approach. However, in more general instances, where exploration restarts, our algorithm achieves better performance, as demonstrated by our simulations. 

## 8 CONCLUSION 

In this work, we investigated a sequential learning problem in matching markets where both sides are initially unaware of their true preferences. Focusing on the pure exploration setting, our objective was to identify the optimal stable matching with high probability. Our primary contribution lies in leveraging partial knowledge of agentsвҖҷ preferences to stop exploration once a pervasive stable matching is found. We first demonstrated the performance gains of this ap-proach on uniform exploration strategies, and subsequently introduced practical elimination algorithms along with a re-fined sample complexity analysis. Further, we extended our insights to the regret minimization setting and established theoretical lower bounds on the sample complexity. For future work, it is worth proving theoretical sample-complexity guarantees for the extended algorithm from Sec-tion 5.3, and investigating whether we can further eliminate pairs after identifying a super stable matching, specifically by removing pairs that are not part of an exposed rotation [Gusfield and Irving, 1989]. In addition, adaptive algorithms, as in [Athanasopoulos et al., 2025, Kong and Li, 2024], that do not uniformly sample active pairs are also a promising approach. Finally, designing optimal algorithms that match the lower bound established in our analysis remains an open problem. 

Acknowledgements 

This project was partially supported by the Research Council of Norway through its Centre of Excellence: Integreat - The Norwegian Centre for knowledge-driven machine learning, project number 332645. 

References 

Andreas Athanasopoulos, Anne-Marie George, and Christos Dimitrakakis. Probably correct optimal stable match-ing for two-sided market under uncertainty. In Pro-ceedings of the 24th International Conference on Au-tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , AAMAS вҖҷ25, page 152вҖ“160, Richland, SC, 2025. International Foun-dation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. ISBN 9798400714269. Soumya Basu. Competing bandits in matching markets via super stability. In Forty-second International Con-ference on Machine Learning , 2025. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=mNxjoMiFFf .Soumya Basu, Karthik Abinav Sankararaman, and Abishek Sankararaman. Beyond log 2(t) regret for decen-tralized bandits in matching markets. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang, editors, Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research , pages 705вҖ“715, Virtual, 18вҖ“24 Jul 2021. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v139/basu21a.html .Ioannis Caragiannis, Aris Filos-Ratsikas, Panagiotis Kanel-lopoulos, and Rohit Vaish. Stable fractional matchings. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation , pages 21вҖ“39, 2019. Sarah H. Cen and Devavrat Shah. Regret, stability & fairness in matching markets with bandit learners. In Gustau Camps-Valls, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, and Is-abel Valera, editors, Proceedings of The 25th Interna-tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-tics , volume 151 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research , pages 8938вҖ“8968, Virtual, 28вҖ“30 Mar 2022. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v151/cen22a.html .Sanmay Das and Emir Kamenica. Two-sided bandits and the dating market. In Proceedings of the 19th Inter-national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , IJ-CAIвҖҷ05, page 947вҖ“952, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2005. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. RГ©my Degenne, Wouter M. Koolen, and Pierre MГ©-nard. Non-asymptotic pure exploration by solving games. In Neural Information Processing Systems ,2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar. org/CorpusID:195584182 .Eyal Even-Dar, Shie Mannor, and Yishay Mansour. Pac bounds for multi-armed bandit and markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Confer-ence on Computational Learning Theory , COLT вҖҷ02, page 255вҖ“270, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 354043836X. Eyal Even-Dar, Shie Mannor, and Yishay Mansour. Action elimination and stopping conditions for the multi-armed bandit and reinforcement learning problems. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 7:1079вҖ“1105, dec 2006. ISSN 1532-4435. Harold N. Gabow and Oded Kariv. Algorithms for edge col-oring bipartite graphs. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , STOC вҖҷ78, page 184вҖ“192, New York, NY, USA, 1978. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450374378. doi: 10.1145/800133.804346. URL https://doi.org/ 10.1145/800133.804346 .D. Gale and L. S. Shapley. College admissions and the sta-bility of marriage. The American Mathematical Monthly ,69(1):9вҖ“15, 1962. ISSN 00029890, 19300972. URL 

http://www.jstor.org/stable/2312726 .AurГ©lien Garivier and Emilie Kaufmann. Optimal best arm identification with fixed confidence. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 998вҖ“1027. PMLR, 2016. Dan Gusfield and Robert W Irving. The stable marriage problem: structure and algorithms . MIT press, 1989. Hadi Hosseini, Sanjukta Roy, and Duohan Zhang. Putting gale &amp; shapley to work: Guaranteeing stability through learning. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Bel-grave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 37, pages 69043вҖ“69068. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. Robert W. Irving. Stable marriage and indif-ference. Discrete Applied Mathematics , 48 (3):261вҖ“272, 1994. ISSN 0166-218X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-218X(92)00179-P. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/0166218X9200179P .Meena Jagadeesan, Alexander Wei, Yixin Wang, Michael Jordan, and Jacob Steinhardt. Learning equilibria in matching markets from bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:3323вҖ“3335, 2021a. Meena Jagadeesan, Alexander Wei, Yixin Wang, Michael I. Jordan, and Jacob Steinhardt. Learning equilibria in matching markets from bandit feedback. CoRR ,abs/2108.08843, 2021b. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2108.08843 .Kevin Jamieson, Matthew Malloy, Robert Nowak, and SГ©bastien Bubeck. lilвҖҷ ucb : An optimal exploration algorithm for multi-armed bandits. In Maria Florina Balcan, Vitaly Feldman, and Csaba SzepesvГЎri, editors, 

Proceedings of The 27th Conference on Learning The-ory , volume 35 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 423вҖ“439, Barcelona, Spain, 13вҖ“15 Jun 2014. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v35/jamieson14.html .Marc Jourdan, MojmГӯr Mutn `y, Johannes Kirschner, and Andreas Krause. Efficient pure exploration for combina-torial bandits with semi-bandit feedback. In Algorithmic Learning Theory , pages 805вҖ“849. PMLR, 2021. Emilie Kaufmann, Olivier CappГ©, and AurГ©lien Garivier. On the complexity of best-arm identification in multi-armed bandit models. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(1):1вҖ“42, 2016. Fang Kong and Shuai Li. Player-optimal stable regret for bandit learning in matching markets. In Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) , pages 1512вҖ“1522. SIAM, 2023. Fang Kong and Shuai Li. Improved bandits in many-to-one matching markets with incentive compatibility. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , pages 13256вҖ“13264, 2024. Fang Kong, Junming Yin, and Shuai Li. Thompson sampling for bandit learning in matching markets. In Lud De Raedt, editor, Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22 , pages 3164вҖ“3170, Vienna, Austria, 7 2022. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2022/439. URL https://doi.org/ 10.24963/ijcai.2022/439 . Main Track. Tor Lattimore and Csaba SzepesvГЎri. Bandit algorithms .Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2020. Tor Lattimore and Csaba SzepesvГЎri. Bandit Algorithms .Cambridge University Press, 2020. Lydia T. Liu, Horia Mania, and Michael Jordan. Compet-ing bandits in matching markets. In Silvia Chiappa and Roberto Calandra, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1618вҖ“1628. PMLR, 26вҖ“28 Aug 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v108/liu20c.html .Lydia T Liu, Feng Ruan, Horia Mania, and Michael I Jor-dan. Bandit learning in decentralized matching markets. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(211):1вҖ“34, 2021. David F Manlove. Algorithmics of Matching Under Preferences . WORLD SCIENTIFIC, Singapore, 2013. doi: 10.1142/8591. URL 

https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/ abs/10.1142/8591 .Shie Mannor and John N Tsitsiklis. The sample complexity of exploration in the multi-armed bandit problem. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 5(Jun):623вҖ“648, 2004. Tejas Pagare and Avishek Ghosh. Explore-then-commit algorithms for decentralized two-sided matching markets. In 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) , pages 2092вҖ“2097. IEEE, 2024. Sasha Rakhlin and Karthik Sridharan. Optimization, learn-ing, and games with predictable sequences. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 26, 2013. Baharak Rastegari, Anne Condon, Nicole Immorlica, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Two-sided matching with partial information. In Proceedings of the fourteenth ACM con-ference on Electronic Commerce , pages 733вҖ“750, 2013. Baharak Rastegari, Anne Condon, Nicole Immorlica, Robert Irving, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Reasoning about opti-mal stable matchings under partial information. In Pro-ceedings of the fifteenth ACM conference on Economics and computation , pages 431вҖ“448, 2014. Alvin E Roth. The evolution of the labor market for medical interns and residents: a case study in game theory. Journal of political Economy , 92(6):991вҖ“1016, 1984. Alvin E. Roth and Marilda A. Oliveira Sotomayor. Two-Sided Matching: A Study in Game-Theoretic Modeling and Analysis . Econometric Society Monographs. Cam-bridge University Press, 1990. Peash Ranjan Saha, Salimur Choudhury, and Kai Salomaa. Altruistic bandit learning for one-to-many matching mar-kets. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Confer-ence on Information Technology for Social Good , pages 197вҖ“203, 2024. Abishek Sankararaman, Soumya Basu, and Karthik Abi-nav Sankararaman. Dominate or delete: Decentralized competing bandits in serial dictatorship. In Arindam Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu, editors, Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence and Statistics , volume 130 of Proceedings of Ma-chine Learning Research , pages 1252вҖ“1260, Virtual, 13вҖ“ 15 Apr 2021. PMLR. URL https://proceedings. mlr.press/v130/sankararaman21a.html .Boris Spieker. The set of super-stable marriages forms a distributive lattice. Discrete applied mathematics , 58(1): 79вҖ“84, 1995. William R Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples. Biometrika , 25(3-4):285вҖ“294, 1933. Zilong Wang, Liya Guo, Junming Yin, and Shuai Li. Bandit learning in many-to-one matching markets. In Proceed-ings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Infor-mation & Knowledge Management , pages 2088вҖ“2097, 2022. Yirui Zhang and Zhixuan Fang. Decentralized two-sided bandit learning in matching market. In Negar Kiyavash and Joris M. Mooij, editors, Proceedings of the For-tieth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 244 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research , pages 4173вҖ“4191. PMLR, 15вҖ“19 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v244/zhang24b.html .Probably Correct Optimal Stable Matching: The Two-Sided Uncertainty Case (Supplementary Material) 

Andreas Athanasopoulos 1 Anne-Marie George 2 Christos Dimitrakakis 11University of NeuchГўtel, NeuchГўtel, Switzerland 

> 2

University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 

## APPENDIX OUTLINE 

In this appendix, we provide the detailed proofs and discussion omitted from the main text. вҖў Appendix A: Provides an extended related work section along with a discussion on different learning objectives. вҖў Appendix B: Contains the analysis of Theorems 4.1 and 4.2 from Section 4. вҖў Appendix C: Contains the proof of Theorem 5.1 from Section 5.1. вҖў Appendix D: Contains the proof of Theorem 5.2 from Section 5.2. вҖў Appendix E: Contains the proof of Proposition 5.3 from Section 5.3. вҖў Appendix F: Contains the proof of Theorem 6.1 from Section 6. вҖў Appendix G: Contains the analysis of the lower bound for specific instance and the proof of Lemma G.1. 

## A EXTENDED RELATED WORK 

This section provides additional discussion on related work, expanding upon the overview presented in the main text. 

MAB and pure exploration: The stochastic MAB problem, introduced by Thompson [1933], has been extensively studied in the past few decades, becoming a fundamental tool for analyzing online decision-making problems under uncertainty. A learner selects one action (or arm) in each round and receives a numeric reward drawn from an unknown distribution that reflects the utility of the action. In the classic version of regret minimization, the learner aims to maximize cumulative rewards by balancing exploration and exploitation: searching for optimal actions versus pulling known high-reward arms. Another popular setting is the pure exploration problem, where the learnerвҖҷs objective is to identify a good action regardless of the cost incurred in the learning process. This problem is usually studied in the fixed-confidence setting, where the learner aims to identify an optimal action with high probability using as few samples as possible [Even-Dar et al., 2002]. Initial research in the field explored uniform exploration and elimination-based strategies Mannor and Tsitsiklis [2004], Even-Dar et al. [2006], focusing on their correctness and sample complexity. More recent studies Kaufmann et al. [2016], Garivier and Kaufmann [2016] establish a lower bound on sample complexity, motivating the Track-and-Stop algorithm which achieves asymptotic optimality. In this paper, we study identifying the optimal stable matching in the fixed-confidence setting. For a comprehensive overview of MAB, we refer to the book by Lattimore and SzepesvГЎri [2020]. 

Stable matching problem: Two-sided matching markets model situations in which two distinct sets of agents aim to match with each other based on individual preferences [Gusfield and Irving, 1989, Roth and Sotomayor, 1990, Manlove, 2013]. Classic examples include students applying to universities, workers matching with firms, and organ donors paired with patients [Roth, 1984]. In their fundamental work, Gale and Shapley [1962] introduced the concept of stable matching, a notion of equilibrium in which no two agents have an incentive to deviate. Gale and Shapley [1962] proved that the set of stable matchings Sis always non-empty by introducing the GaleвҖ“Shapley (GS) algorithm, which is based on sequential proposals from one side of the market to the other. The algorithm returns the (unique) optimal stable matching mвӢҶ for the proposing side, in the sense that every proposer receives the best partner they can obtain in any stable matching. Conversely, the resulting matching is pessimal for the side receiving the proposals, providing each agent on that side with their least-preferred partner among all stable matchings. A core component of our approach is utilizing the agentsвҖҷ partial preference rankings to identify an optimal stable matching, thereby circumventing the need to learn their full preference orderings. This approach is motivated by the concept of 

pervasive stable matching , introduced by Rastegari et al. [2014] to reason about optimal stable matchings under partial information in non-learning scenarios. Specifically, a partial preference profile of the agents admits a pervasive stable matching if that matching remains optimally stable under every possible full refinement of the given preferences. A closely related notion is that of a super stable matching , initially introduced to address stability in instances with indifferent preferences [Irving, 1994]. 

Leaning in matching markets: The problem of two-sided markets with unknown preferences has recently attracted considerable attention in various settings. Das and Kamenica were the first to introduce the marriage problem with unknown preferences on both sides of the market, framing it as a MAB problem. In their work Das and Kamenica [2005], they empirically studied several algorithms in specific preference settings. A follow-up by Liu et al. [2020] introduced the notions of Player-Optimal and Player-Pessimal stable regret. Focusing on a setting where only one side of the market has unknown preferences, they analyzed an Explore-Then-Commit algorithm, proving sublinear bounds for both regret notions. They also examined an Upper Confidence Bound approach, establishing sublinear bounds for Player-Pessimal stable regret; however, they proved an impossibility result for bounding Player-Optimal regret. Later studies closed this gap by achieving sublinear player-optimal stable regret [Sankararaman et al., 2021, Basu et al., 2021, Kong and Li, 2023], though they primarily focused on one-sided uncertainty and specific market structures. More recent studies have begun to consider settings where both sides of the market have uncertain preferences [Pagare and Ghosh, 2024, Zhang and Fang, 2024]. However, these works employ Explore-Then-Commit type algorithms. In contrast, this work adopts a pure exploration framework that is more naturally suited to the analysis of such algorithms and enables refined results on regret with respect to the optimal stable matching. The pure exploration objective of identifying an optimal stable matching with high probability was introduced by Athana-sopoulos et al. [2025], while the work of Hosseini et al. [2024] focuses on identifying any stable matching. Both of these studies propose elimination-based algorithms restricted to one-sided uncertainty. We extend this literature by tackling a two-sided learning environment, providing refined arguments for the analysis of elimination algorithms. Conceptually, the closest work to ours is Basu [2025], where the authors leverage partial preferences and the concept of super stability to bound regret in sequential learning scenarios. In contrast, our approach specifically relies on pervasive stable matchings, instead of the super stable matching. This distinction is crucial, as our objective is to identify the optimal 

stable matching, rather than any stable matching. Prior work also considers decentralized settings [Liu et al., 2021, Kong et al., 2022, Sankararaman et al., 2021, Basu et al., 2021, Pagare and Ghosh, 2024, Zhang and Fang, 2024], models with transferable-utilities [Cen and Shah, 2022, Jagadeesan et al., 2021a, Basu, 2025], and the setting with many-to-one matchings [Saha et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2022, Kong and Li, 2024]. 

Discussion on alternative objectives: Related work typically characterizes algorithmic performance based on the cumulative rewards collected by individual agents. In particular, most existing approaches follow the notion of agent-optimal (or pessimal) stable regret, which compares accumulated rewards against a baseline that always selects the optimal stable matching, following the definitions in the seminal work of Liu et al. [2020]. This cumulative metric reflects stability only if the regret is sublinear for every agent in the market. Furthermore, this objective can be satisfied by a composition of unstable matchings over the time horizonвҖ”similar to the concept of fractional stability over probabilistic matchings that may individually be unstable [Caragiannis et al., 2019]. Another notion of regret, more compatible with our objective, is binary stable regret, which evaluates the stability of the matching at each discrete time step [Das and Kamenica, 2005, Basu, 2025]. Current studies in this area typically consider a matching to be stable without specifically requiring the identification of the optimal stable matching. Additionally, algorithms addressing these different objectives often rely on the Explore-then-Commit (ETC) framework, bounding the probability of error through sufficient exploration [Liu et al., 2020, Pagare and Ghosh, 2024, Basu, 2025, Kong and Li, 2023]. Notable exceptions to these ETC-based approaches include analyses of UCB-style algorithms [Liu et al., 2020, Jagadeesan et al., 2021b] and Thompson sampling [Kong et al., 2022], which do not guarantee sublinear regret with respect to the optimal stable matching. Ultimately, different objectives prioritize different criteria; we emphasize that our framework is specifically designed for applications where the primary goal is to learn the optimal stable matching itself, rather than merely achieving stability in a cumulative or general sense. 

## B ANALYSIS OF SECTION 4 

In this section, we provide the proofs for the sample complexity of our uniform exploration strategies. 

B.1 PROOF OF THEOREM 4.1 

Proof. We begin the proof by characterizing the sample complexity of the algorithm. We recall that the sample complexity is defined as the total number of matchings performed by the algorithm until termination. 

Sample Complexity 

The sample complexity follows directly from the design of Algorithm 1. In each exploration round h, the algorithm ensures that every available pair (p, a ) вҲҲ P Г— A is sampled exactly once, by sampling a sequence of n = max {K, N } matchings. This is achieved by sampling the matching from a minimal matching cover M(P Г— A ). By KЛқ onigвҖҷs Theorem, the size of this cover is equal to the maximum degree of the underlying complete bipartite graph, which is max {K, N }

Given that the total number of exploration rounds is h, the total number of matchings sampled is: 

П„ = h В· max {K, N } =

 8 ln(2 KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2min 



В· max {K, N }. (10) Thus, the sample complexity is O



max {K, N } ln( KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2min 



.

Correctness 

We now prove that the algorithm returns the optimal stable matching with probability at least 1вҲ’Оҙ, i.e., Pr( mП„ = mвӢҶ) вүҘ 1вҲ’Оҙ.If all agentsвҖҷ preference orderings are estimated correctly, then running GS on the estimated profile returns the true optimal stable matching; therefore, 

Pr( mП„ = mвӢҶ) вүҘ Pr 

 ЛҶFa = Fa вҲҖa вҲҲ A



= 1 вҲ’ Pr 



вҲғa вҲҲ A : ЛҶFaМё = Fa



.

Thus, it suffices to show Pr( вҲғa вҲҲ A : ЛҶFaМё = Fa) вүӨ Оҙ.Now fix an agent a вҲҲ A. A sufficient condition for every empirical ranking ЛҶFa to match Fa, is that for every agent i вҲҲ OS (a),

|ЛҶОјa,i вҲ’ Ојa,i | < вҲҶmin  

> 2

holds. Thus for every pair (i, j ) where Ојa,i > Ој a,j we have that: 

ЛҶОјa,i > Ој a,i вҲ’ вҲҶmin 

2 вүҘ Ојa,j + вҲҶmin 

2 > ЛҶОјa,j , (11) ensuring that ЛҶОјa,i > ЛҶОјa,j using the definition of вҲҶmin .By the construction of Algorithm 1, each pair (a, i ) вҲҲ A Г— OS (a) is sampled exactly h times. Since the rewards are 

1-sub-Gaussian, the empirical mean ЛҶОјa,i is (1 /h )-sub-Gaussian. Applying the standard sub-Gaussian tail bound: 

Pr( ЛҶFaМё = Fa) = Pr 



|ЛҶОјa,i вҲ’ Ојa,i | вүҘ вҲҶmin 

2



вүӨ 2 exp 



вҲ’ h(вҲҶ min /2) 2

2



= 2 exp 



вҲ’ hвҲҶ2min 

8



. (12) By applying a union bound over all KN pairs in the bipartite market: 

P



вҲғa вҲҲ A : ЛҶFaМё = Fa



вүӨ X

> aвҲҲA

P

 ЛҶFaМё = Fa



вүӨ 2KN exp 



вҲ’ hвҲҶ2min 

8



. (13) Now setting h =

l 8 ln(2 KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2min 

m

, results that P



вҲғa вҲҲ A : ЛҶFaМё = Fa



вүӨ Оҙ and thus: 

Pr( mП„ = mвӢҶ) < 1 вҲ’ Оҙ (14) That concludes the proof. B.2 PROOF OF THEOREM 4.2 

Proof. Now we continue with a similar analysis for the second version of the algorithm, using arguments regarding the preference profiles Pvalid (F ОҪ

> A

).

Sample Complexity 

The sample complexity follows again directly from the definition of the algorithm, where in each exploration round 

h we sample max {K, N } number of matchings. Setting h = вҢҲ 8 ln(2 KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2

> F

вҢү results in a sample complexity of 

O



max {K, N } ln( KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2

> F



.

Correctness 

We now prove that the algorithm returns the optimal stable matching with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Instead of learning the full preferences FA for the agents, the algorithm samples enough to learn a valid preference profile PA вҲҲ P valid (FA). By definition, a valid preference profile admits a pervasive stable matching , and thus, running the GS ( ЛҶFA) algorithm with any realization of the preferences PA, i.e., ЛҶFA вҲҲ F (PA) = {FA | PA 7 вҶ’ FA} results in the true optimal stable matching mвӢҶ.More precisely, we have that: 

Pr( mП„ = mвӢҶ) вүҘ Pr( вҲғPA вҲҲ P valid : ЛҶFA вҲҲ F (PA)) вүҘ Pr( ЛҶFA вҲҲ F (P вӢҶ)) . (15) where P вӢҶA = arg max P вҲҲP valid (FA) вҲҶmin (P ) be the valid preference profile that attains the admissible gap вҲҶmin (P вӢҶA) = вҲҶ F .A sufficient condition for the empirical profile ЛҶFA to refine P вҲ— 

> A

is that for every agent a вҲҲ A and every i вҲҲ OS (a), the condition |ЛҶОјa,i вҲ’ Ојa,i | < вҲҶF 

> 2

holds. Thus, for every agent a вҲҲ A and every pair (i, j ) вҲҲ P вҲ— 

> a

where Ојa,i вүҘ Ојa,j , we have that: 

ЛҶОјa,i > Ој a,i вҲ’ вҲҶF

2 вүҘ Ојa,j + вҲҶF

2 > ЛҶОјa,j ,

ensuring that the relative ordering in P вҲ— 

> A

is correctly estimated. By the construction of Algorithm 1, each pair (a, i ) вҲҲ A Г— OS (a) is sampled exactly h times. Since the rewards are 1-sub-Gaussian, the empirical mean ЛҶОјa,i is (1 /h )-sub-Gaussian. Applying the standard sub-Gaussian tail bound: 

P r 



|ЛҶОјa,i вҲ’ Ојa,i | вүҘ вҲҶF

2



вүӨ 2 exp 



вҲ’ h(вҲҶ F /2) 2

2



= 2 exp 



вҲ’ hвҲҶ2

> F

8



By applying a union bound over all KN pairs in the bipartite market: 

P



вҲғa вҲҲ A, i вҲҲ OS (a) : |ЛҶОјa,i вҲ’ Ојa,i | вүҘ вҲҶF

2



вүӨ X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

P



|ЛҶОјa,i вҲ’ Ојa,i | вүҘ вҲҶF

2



вүӨ 2KN exp 



вҲ’ hвҲҶ2

> F

8



Now setting h =

l 8 ln(2 KN/Оҙ )вҲҶ2

> F

m

ensures that the probability of failing to correctly estimate the valid preference profile is bounded by Оҙ, and thus: 

P r (mП„ = mвҲ—) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ

## C ANALYSIS OF SECTION 5 

C.1 PROOF OF THEOREM 5.1 

Proof. 

Correctness argument 

We first present a formal argument that the elimination algorithm identifies the optimal stable matching with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.To begin, the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate because the confidence radius ca,i (t) shrinks toward zero as the number of samples t increases. Since the algorithm continues to sample every non-eliminated pair in each round, the confidence intervals will eventually shrink enough to resolve the relative ordering of every pair. Consequently, the algorithm will eventually eliminate all pairs satisfying the stopping condition. Now, let E be the event that the true means Ојa,i lie within the confidence intervals for all estimates ЛҶОјa,i (t) at all times t.Formally, E is the intersection of all individual events Et,a,i :

E =

> вҲһ

\

> t=1

\

> aвҲҲA

\

> iвҲҲOS (a)

Et,a,i , (16) where Et,a,i denotes the event that the true mean Ојa,i lies within the confidence interval at time t:

Et,a,i = {| ЛҶОјa,i (t) вҲ’ Ојa,i | вүӨ ca,i (t)} . (17) In Lemma C.1 we prove that the event E holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, i.e. Pr( E) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.Under event E, the algorithm only adds correct preference relations to Pa because LCB a,i (t) > U CB a,j (t) implies 

Ојa,i > Ој a,j . Since the algorithm terminates with a valid preference profile ЛҶPA вҲҲ P valid (FA), it returns the correct optimal stable matching mвӢҶ

To conclude, under the good event E, which holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the algorithm returns the optimal stable matching. 

C.2 SAMPLE COMPLEXITY 

We now continue the analysis on sample complexity in terms of matching samples. Recall that in each round t, we sample every non-eliminated pair St by sampling nt matchings from a minimum matching cover M(St).Let П„a,i denote the number of rounds required to eliminate agent i вҲҲ OS (a) from the active set Sa of agent a вҲҲ A. To eliminate agent i, we must successfully distinguish it from every other agent j вҲҲ OS (a) \ { i}. Therefore, the elimination time is dominated by the time required to separate i from its closest competitor, which corresponds to the minimum reward gap вҲҶa,i = min jвҲҲOS (a)\{ i} |Ојa,i вҲ’ Ојa,j |. By applying Lemma C.2 we have that: 

П„a,i вүӨ 32 log(8 KN/ (ОҙвҲҶa,i )) вҲҶ2

> a,i

. (18) Since eliminating a pair (p, a ) вҲҲ P Г— A requires removing p from Sa and a from Sp, the maximal number of rounds is 

tp,a = max {П„p,a , П„ a,p } вүӨ 32 log(8 KN/ (ОҙвҲҶmin    

> p,a )) (вҲҶ min
> p,a )2

, where вҲҶmin  

> p,a

= min {вҲҶp,a , вҲҶa,p }.

p1

p2

p3

Set P

a1

a2

a3

Set A

tp1,a 1

Figure 4: Illustration of the bipartite graph G.A. Sample complexity Without Stopping Rule 

Next, we give the sample complexity ignoring the stopping rule where the algorithm terminates if the partial preferences admit a pervasive stable matching. Given the sampling requirements tp,a for each pair of agents (p, a ) вҲҲ P Г— A (where tp,a = ta,p ) , we construct a bipartite multigraph GM = ( V = P вҲӘ A , E = P Г— A ) illustrated in Figure 4, where tp,a denotes the edge multiplicity for the pair 

(p, a ). By KЛқ onigвҖҷs Theorem, there exists a decomposition of these edges into deg (GM ) matchings, where deg (GM ) is the maximum degree of the multigraph. Consequently, the number of matchings is at most: 

O(max 

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

ta,i ) (19) since P 

> iвҲҲOS (a)

ta,i denotes the degree of agent a in the multigraph. As a note, we use this variant of the algorithm to demonstrate the isolated effect of the elimination rule in the experiments section. 

B. Sample complexity With Stopping Rule 

We now perform the analysis considering the stopping rule. The algorithm terminates once it correctly estimates a partial preference profile ЛҶPA that admits a pervasive stable matching, i.e., ЛҶPA вҲҲ P valid (FA). By definition, there exists at least one valid preference profile P FA вҲҲ P valid (FA) that admits the maximum possible minimum gap вҲҶF

Since the algorithm uniformly samples every non-eliminated pair in each round, it is guaranteed to correctly estimate all preference relations in this optimal target profile P FA once all reward gaps of size at least вҲҶF are resolved. By applying Lemma C.2, this requires at most П„ F rounds, where 

П„ F вүӨ 32 log(8 KN/ (ОҙвҲҶF )) вҲҶ2

> F

. (20) Consequently, any pair (a, i ) is sampled only until it is individually eliminated from the active sets, or until the algorithm successfully identifies P FA and terminates globally. Thus, the number of times pair (a, i ) is sampled is strictly bounded by 

tFa,i = min( ta,i , П„ F ). Using the individual elimination bound for ta,i (Eq. 18) and the global termination bound П„ F , we have: 

tFa,i вүӨ 32 log(8 KN/ (ОҙвҲҶFa,i )) (вҲҶ Fa,i )2 , (21) where вҲҶFa,i = max(вҲҶ F , вҲҶmin  

> a,i

).Following the logic of the previous analysis, we consider the bipartite multigraph GM with edge multiplicities tFa,i . By KЛқ onigвҖҷs Theorem, there exists a decomposition of these edges into deg (GM ) matchings, where deg (GM ) is the maximum degree. Therefore, the total number of matching samples is at most: 

O

пЈ«пЈӯmax 

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

tFa,i 

пЈ¶пЈё (22) To conclude, we prove that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the algorithm terminates with the correct optimal stable matching, and that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the sample complexity is at most: 

O

пЈ«пЈӯmax 

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

32 log(8 KN/ (ОҙвҲҶFa,i )) (вҲҶ Fa,i )2 ,

пЈ¶пЈё (23) where вҲҶFa,i = max(вҲҶ F , вҲҶmin  

> a,i

).C.3 USEFUL LEMMAS Lemma C.1. Let E be the event that for all time steps t вүҘ 1, all agents a вҲҲ A, and all agents i вҲҲ OS (a), the empirical mean estimates lie within the confidence intervals defined by ca,i (t) = 

q 2 ln(8 KN t 2/Оҙ ) 

> t

. Then, the probability of this event holds satisfies: 

Pr( E) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. (24) 

Proof. We bound the probability of the bad event Ec, defined as the event where there exists a time step t, an agent a, and a candidate i such that the empirical mean falls outside the confidence interval: |ЛҶОјa,i (t) вҲ’ Ојa,i | вүҘ ca,i (t).Using the union bound over all time steps t вүҘ 1, all agents a вҲҲ A, and all candidates i вҲҲ OS (a), we have: 

Pr( Ec) вүӨ

> вҲһ

X

> t=1

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

Pr( Ect,a,i ). (25) Since the rewards are 1-sub-Gaussian and we use the confidence radius ca,i (t) = 

q 2 ln(8 KN t 2/Оҙ ) 

> t

, applying the concentration bound for sub-Gaussian random variables yields (Corollary 5.5. [Lattimore and SzepesvГЎri, 2020]): 

Pr( Ect,a,i ) = Pr ( |ЛҶОјa,i (t) вҲ’ Ојa,i | вүҘ ca,i (t)) (26) 

вүӨ 2 exp 

 вҲ’tc a,i (t)2

2



(27) 

= Оҙ

4KN t 2 . (28) Substituting this back into the union bound sum: 

Pr( Ec) вүӨ

> вҲһ

X

> t=1

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

Оҙ

4KN t 2 вүӨ Оҙ

> вҲһ

X

> t=1

12t2 вүӨ Оҙ. (29) Finally, Pr( E) = 1 вҲ’ Pr( Ec) = 1 вҲ’ Оҙ witch concludes the proof. 

Lemma C.2. Fix an agent a вҲҲ A and two distinct agents i, j вҲҲ OS (a). Let вҲҶa,i,j = |Ојa,i вҲ’ Ојa,j | be the true reward gap between i and j. Under the event E, the number of rounds П„a,i,j required to separate agent i from agent j is at most: 

П„a,i,j вүӨ 32 log(8 KN/ (ОҙвҲҶa,i,j )) вҲҶ2

> a,i,j

. (30) 

Proof. Assume, without loss of generality, that Ојa,i > Ој a,j . The algorithm successfully separates agent i from agent j at round t if their confidence intervals become strictly disjoint, which occurs when LCB a,i (t) > U CB a,j (t).Under the good event E, the empirical means are bounded by their confidence radii c(t), meaning ЛҶОјa,i (t) вүҘ Ојa,i вҲ’ c(t) and 

ЛҶОјa,j (t) вүӨ Ојa,j + c(t). Substituting these into the lower and upper bounds, we get: 

LCB a,i (t) = ЛҶ Ојa,i (t) вҲ’ c(t) вүҘ Ојa,i вҲ’ 2c(t) (31) 

U CB a,j (t) = ЛҶ Ојa,j (t) + c(t) вүӨ Ојa,j + 2 c(t) (32) Therefore, a sufficient condition to guarantee LCB a,i (t) > U CB a,j (t) is: 

Ојa,i вҲ’ 2c(t) > Ој a,j + 2 c(t) = вҮ’ вҲҶa,i,j > 4c(t). (33) Substituting the confidence radius c(t) = 

q 2 ln(8 KN t 2/Оҙ ) 

> t

into our sufficient condition yields: 

вҲҶa,i,j > 4

r 2 ln(8 KN t 2/Оҙ )

t =

r 32 ln(8 KN t 2/Оҙ )

t . (34) Squaring both sides and solving for t, we find that the intervals are guaranteed to separate for any round t satisfying: 

t > 32 вҲҶ2

> a,i,j

log 

 8KN t 2

Оҙ



. (35) Using standard algebraic bounds for isolating t in action-elimination algorithms, this inequality is satisfied for a number of rounds at most: 

П„a,i,j вүӨ 32 log(8 KN/ (ОҙвҲҶa,i,j )) вҲҶ2

> a,i,j

. (36) This concludes the proof. 

## D PROOF OF THEOREM 5.2 

Proof. We consider the meta-algorithm that runs the E-PSM algorithm during the exploration phase. If the algorithm terminates at round П„ < T , it commits to the identified matching mП„ for the remainder of the horizon T .Let E denote the good event where the algorithm outputs the correct optimal stable matching, i.e., E = {mП„ = mвӢҶ}. By Theorem 5.1, the E-PSM algorithm is Оҙ-PCOS. Thus, the probability of success is bounded by P(E) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, and the probability of failure is bounded by P(Ec) вүӨ Оҙ.Using the law of total expectation, we can decompose the expected regret as follows: 

E[R(T )] = E[R(T ) | E ]P(E) + E[R(T ) | E c]P(Ec) (37) 

вүӨ E[R(T ) | E ] В· 1 + T В· Оҙ, (38) where we used the trivial bound P(E) вүӨ 1.Conditioned on the good event E, the algorithm correctly identifies mвӢҶ and incurs zero regret during the commitment phase. Since there is no a guarantee that the required exploration time П„ вүӨ T , we have: 

E[R(T ) | E ] = E[min( П„, T ) | E ]. (39) Setting our confidence parameter to Оҙ = 1 /T yields to: 

E[R(T )] вүӨ E[min( П„, T ) | E ] + 1 . (40) Finally, substituting the bound sample complexity derived in Theorem 5.1, that hold under the good event, we have that: 

E[R(T )] вүӨ O 

пЈ«пЈӯmin 

пЈұпЈІпЈіT, max 

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

32 log(8 KN T / вҲҶFa,i )(вҲҶ Fa,i )2

пЈјпЈҪпЈҫпЈ¶пЈё . (41) which concludes the proof. 

## E EXTENDED ELIMINATION ALGORITHM 

Now we provide a proof of our Proposition 5.3 that we restate bellow: 

Proposition E.1 (Restated) . Let F вҲ— be a full ranking profile for agents A = P вҲӘ A with P-optimal stable matching mвҲ—.Then the following partial profile P is a valid profile for F вҲ—:

вҖў вҲҖp вҲҲ P , Pp = {(a, a вҖІ) вҲҲ A Г— A | a вү» aвҖІ вӘ°F вҲ— 

> p

mвҲ—(p)}вҲӘ { (a, a вҖІ) вҲҲ A Г— A | a вӘ°F вҲ— 

> p

mвҲ—(p) вү»F вҲ— 

> p

aвҖІ}

вҖў вҲҖa вҲҲ A , Pa = {(p, p вҖІ) вҲҲ A Г— A | pвҖІ вүә p вӘҜF вҲ— 

> a

mвҲ—(a)}вҲӘ { (p, p вҖІ) вҲҲ A Г— A | p вӘҜF вҲ— 

> a

mвҲ—(a) вүәF вҲ— 

> a

pвҖІ}Algorithm 3 EE-PSM: Extended Elimination PSM 

Require: Оҙ, P, A

1: Sa вҶҗ OS (a) вҲҖa вҲҲ A в–· Active pairs 

2: Pa вҶҗ вҲ… вҲҖa вҲҲ A в–· Partial rank 

3: mП„ = P OSM ({Pa}aвҲҲA)

4: while mП„ = NONE вҲ§ S 

> aвҲҲA

SaМё = вҲ… do 

5: St вҶҗ { (p, a ) вҲҲ P Г— A | a вҲҲ Sp(t) вҲЁ p вҲҲ Sa(t)}

6: for m вҲҲ M(St) do 

7: Sample update ЛҶОјa,m (a) вҲҖa вҲҲ A

8: end for 

9: Update ca,i (t) вҲҖa вҲҲ A, i вҲҲ OS (a) в–· Eq. 2 

10: Update Pa вҲҖa вҲҲ A в–· Eq. 5 

11: Eliminate pairs in Sa в–· Eq. 6 

12: if m = SSM ({Pa}aвҲҲA) exists then 

13: for all (p, a ) /вҲҲ m with p вҲҲ Sa or a вҲҲ Sp do 

14: if m(p) вү»Pp a then Sp вҶҗ Sp \ { a}

15: if p вү»Pa m(a) then Sa вҶҗ Sa \ { p}

16: end for 

17: end if 

18: mП„ = P OSM ({Pa}aвҲҲA)

19: end while 

20: return mП„

Proof. Consider some full ranking profile F compatible with P . We first show that mвҲ— is a stable matching in F , and then show that there exists no rotation in F that improves P partners, i.e., mвҲ— is optimal in F .For contradiction, assume there exists a pair (p, a ) blocking mвҲ— in F , i.e., a вү»Fp mвҲ—(p) and p вү»Fa mвҲ—(a). In P all relations of mвҲ—(i) to all other agents on the other side of i are known in Pi, and coincide with the relations in F вҲ—. Because F is compatible with P , we have a вү»F вҲ— 

> p

mвҲ—(p) and p вү»F вҲ— 

> a

mвҲ—(a). But then (p, a ) blocks mвҲ— in F вҲ— вҖ” a contradiction to mвҲ—

being stable in F вҲ—.Now assume, for contradiction, that there exists a rotation (p1, a 1), (p2, a 2), . . . , (pв„“, a в„“) вҲҲ mвҲ— whose elimination, i.e., matching any pi with ai+1 instead of ai = mвҲ—(pi) while maintaining all other matches in mвҲ—,вҖў improves all piвҖҷs preferences, i.e.: 

a(i+1) mod N вү»Fpi ai = mвҲ—(pi) for all i = 1 , . . . , в„“ 

вҖў deteriorates all aiвҖҷs preferences, i.e.: 

p(iвҲ’1) mod N вүәFai pi = mвҲ—(ai) for all i = 1 , . . . , в„“ .Again, all these relations are present in P and because of this also hold in F вҲ—. Thus, (p1, a 1), (p2, a 2), . . . , (pв„“, a в„“) вҲҲ mвҲ— is a rotation in F вҲ— that improves P-preferences in F вҲ— вҖ” a contradiction to the optimality of mвҲ—.Because F was chosen arbitrarily, mвҲ— is the optimal stable matching in any full ranking profile compatible with P . This proves that P is a valid profile for F вҲ—.

## F LOWER BOUND 

We consider a matching problem consisting of two disjoint sets of agents, P and A, with K = |P| and N = |A| number of agents in each set. Let A = P вҲӘ A denote the set of all agents. For any agent a вҲҲ A, we define OS (a) as the set of agents on the opposite side of the market i.e., OS (a) = A if a вҲҲ P , and OS (a) = P if a вҲҲ A .Let I be a class of matching environments, where we define a matching instance ОҪ = {ОҪa,i }aвҲҲA,i вҲҲOS (a) вҲҲ I as a collection of probability distributions, where each ОҪa,i is associated with the agent-partner pair (a, i ). For every pair, the observed reward Xa,i is a random variable drawn from ОҪa,i with a true underlying mean reward Ојa,i = EXвҲјОҪa,i [X], representing the utility agent a derives from being matched with i.For an instance ОҪ вҲҲ I , we denote with mвӢҶОҪ the optimal stable matching. To provide a lower bounds on the sample complexity, we define the set of alternative environments Ialt (ОҪ) as the collection of all environments in I where the optimal stable matching is different from that in ОҪ:

Ialt (ОҪ) = {ОҪвҖІ вҲҲ I : mвӢҶОҪвҖІМё = mвӢҶОҪ } (42) We denote with PОҪ (E) the probability of an event E вҲҲ F t under the environment ОҪ.

F.1 PROOF OF LOWER BOUND Theorem F.1 (Restated) . Fix Оҙ вҲҲ (0 , 1/2) . For any Оҙ-PACOS algorithm and any matching instance ОҪ,

EОҪ [П„ ] вүҘ ln 12.4Оҙ cвҲ’1 

> вӢҶ

(ОҪ) (43) 

where cвӢҶ(ОҪ) is the solution of the following optimization problem: 

cвӢҶ(ОҪ) = sup 

> wвҲҲS |M|

inf 

> ОҪвҖІвҲҲI alt (ОҪ)

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

wa,i KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

) (44) 

Proof. Let Оҙ вҲҲ (0 , 1/2) and consider a ОҙвҲ’PACOS algorithm, where the probability of the event that the algorithm outputs the optimal stable matching is at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, i.e., the probability of the event EОҪ = {mП„ = mвӢҶОҪ } satisfies PОҪ (EОҪ ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.Now consider alternative matching instance ОҪвҖІ вҲҲ E alt (ОҪ), where by definition we have that PОҪвҖІ (EОҪ ) вүӨ Оҙ.Applying the Lemma F.2 to the event EОҪ we have that вҲҖОҪвҖІ вҲҲ I alt (ОҪ):

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )] KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

) вүҘ d(PОҪ (EОҪ ), P ОҪвҖІ (EОҪ )) вүҘ d(1 вҲ’ Оҙ, Оҙ ) (45) where d(x, y ) := x log( x/y ) + (1 вҲ’ x) log((1 вҲ’ x)/(1 вҲ’ y)) is the binary relative entropy. Now we can further bound: X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )] KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

) вүҘ ln 12.4Оҙ (46) using the lower bound on the binary relative entropy d(1 вҲ’ Оҙ, Оҙ ) вүҘ ln 12.4Оҙ for Оҙ вҲҲ (0 , 1/2) Kaufmann et al. [2016]. Taking the infimum over the possible alternative model ОҪвҖІ вҲҲ I alt (ОҪ) we have that: 

ln 12.4Оҙ вүӨ inf 

> ОҪвҖІвҲҲE alt (ОҪ)

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )] KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

) (47) 

вүӨ EОҪ [П„ ] inf 

> ОҪвҖІвҲҲI alt (ОҪ)

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )] 

EОҪ [П„ ] KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

) (48) Now by the definition of the transformed simplex we have that EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )]    

> EОҪ[П„]

вҲҲ S |M| which leeds to: 

ln 12.4Оҙ вүӨ EОҪ [П„ ] sup 

> wвҲҲS |M|

inf 

> ОҪвҖІвҲҲI alt (ОҪ)

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

wa,i KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

) (49) which concludes the proof 

F.2 CHANGE OF DISTRIBUTION LEMMA 

At each time step t вүҘ 1 we sample a matching mt вҲҲ M , and the platform observers the rewards of each agent that is matched Xt = ( Xa,m t(a)I{a вҲҲ mt(a)})вҲҖaвҲҲA вҠӮ RKГ—N similar to the semi-bandit feedback, where Xa,m t(a) is distributed according to ОҪa,m t(a).Given a history Ft = Пғ(m1, X 1,m 1 , В· В· В· , m t, X t,m t ) up to time t, we can define the log-likelihood of the observation for the two different matching instances ОҪ and ОҪвҖІ:

Lt(m1, X 1,m 1 , В· В· В· , m t, X t,m t ) = X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)
> t

X

> s=1

I{(a, i ) вҲҲ mt} ln pa,i (Xs,a,i )

pвҖІ

> a,i

(Xs,a,i ) (50) where pi,j denotes the density of the distribution ОҪi,j .Now, we present a transportation lemma for two-sided matching problems, adapted from Lemma 1 originally proposed in Kaufmann et al. [2016]. 

Lemma F.2 (Change of Distribution for Matching Markets) . Let ОҪ and ОҪвҖІ be two matching market instances where for every agent a вҲҲ A and every potential partner i вҲҲ OS (a), the reward distributions ОҪa,i and ОҪвҖІ 

> a,i

are mutually absolutely continuous. For any almost-surely finite stopping time П„ with respect to (Ft)tвҲҲN, and any event E вҲҲ F Пғ :

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )] KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

) вүҘ d(PОҪ (E), P ОҪвҖІ (E)) 

where d(x, y ) := x log( x/y ) + (1 вҲ’ x) log((1 вҲ’ x)/(1 вҲ’ y)) is the binary relative entropy. Proof. For each (a, i ) вҲҲ A Г— OS (a), let {Xs,a,i }sвүҘ1 be the observation sequence associated with that pair, and let Na,i (П„ )

be the number of times it is sampled up to time П„ ; thus the realized observations by time П„ are {Xs,a,i }Na,i (П„ ) 

> s=1

.Then we can define the the log-likelihood LП„ at time П„ as 

LП„ (m1, X 1,m 1 , В· В· В· , m П„ , X П„,m П„ ) = X

> aвҲҲA

X 

> iвҲҲOS (a)
> Na,i (П„)

X

> s=1

ln pa,i (Xs,a,i )

pвҖІ

> a,i

(Xs,a,i ) . (51) With a direct application of WaldвҖҷs Identity on EОҪ [LП„ ] we have that: 

EОҪ [LП„ ] = X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )] EОҪ [ln pa,i (Xa,i )

pвҖІ

> a,i

(Xa,i ) ] = X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )] KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

)] (52) where in the second equality we use the fact that KL (ОҪ, ОҪ вҖІ) = EОҪ [ln p(X) 

> pвҖІ(X)

].Applying the Lemma 19 from Kaufmann et al. [2016] which state that EОҪ [LП„ ] вүҘ d(PОҪ (E), P ОҪвҖІ (E)) results in: 

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )] KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

) вүҘ d(PОҪ (E), P ОҪвҖІ (E)) 

which concludes the proof. 

## G LOWER BOUNDS ON SPECIFIC INSTANCES 

We can now continue by providing a lower bound based on specific instances. Similar to the work of Kaufmann et al. [2016] we will perform an analysis changing the distribution of one pair of agents, under the identifiable class of environments: 

Iclass = {ОҪ = ( ОҪp,a )вҲҖ(p,a )вҲҲPГ—A : ОҪp,a вҲҲ P m and mвӢҶ(ОҪ)Мё = вҲ…} (53) such that the probability measure Pm satisfies the following continuity assumption: 

Assumption 2. For any two distribution p, q вҲҲ P m, such that pМё = q, and for all Оұ > 0:1. There exist a q1 вҲҲ P m such that: KL (p, q ) < KL (p, q 1) < KL (p, q ) + Оұ and EXвҲјq1 [X] > EXвҲјq [X]

2. There exist a q2 вҲҲ P m such that: KL (p, q ) < KL (p, q 2) < KL (p, q ) + Оұ and EXвҲјq2 [X] < EXвҲјq [X]G.1 GLOBAL PREFERENCES 

We study instances with global preferences similar to Example 7 in Liu et al. [2020]. 

Lemma G.1 (Global preferences) . Consider a matching instance ОҪ вҲҲ I class with equal umber of agents on both sides and that satisfies Assumption 2. Suppose the agents exhibit global preferences such that for all pi вҲҲ P , a1 вү» a2 вү» В· В· В· вү» an,and for all ai вҲҲ A , p1 вү» p2 вү» В· В· В· вү» pn. Then any Оҙ-PACOS Algorithm, satisfies that: 

EОҪ [П„ ] вүҘ log 

 12.4Оҙ



max(max  

> piвҲҲP

Ai, max  

> aiвҲҲA

Bi) (54) 

where 

Ai = max 

 1

KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ pi,a i+1 ) , 1

KL (ОҪai,p i , ОҪ ai,p i+1 )



+ X

> j<i

1

KL (ОҪaj ,p i , ОҪ aj ,p j ) + X

> j>i

1

KL (ОҪpi,a j , ОҪ pi,a i )

and 

Bi = max 

 1

KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ pi,a i+1 ) , 1

KL (ОҪai,p i , ОҪ ai,p i+1 )



+ X

> j<i

1

KL (ОҪpj ,a i , ОҪ pj ,a j ) + X

> j>i

1

KL (ОҪai,p j , ОҪ ai,p i )

Proof. We consider an instance ОҪ with equal umber of agents on both sides and global preference profile F where for all 

pi вҲҲ P , a1 вү» a2 вү» В· В· В· вү» an, and for all ai вҲҲ A , p1 вү» p2 вү» В· В· В· вү» pn, such that the optimal stable matching m is given by 

m(pi) = ai for all i.Figure 5 illustrates the case of three agents on each side. 

p1a1 > a 2 > a 3

p2a1 > a 2 > a 3

p3a1 > a 2 > a 3

a1 p1 > p 2 > p 3

a2 p1 > p 2 > p 3

a3 p1 > p 2 > p 3

Figure 5: Instance with global preferences for N = 3 .We first present a valid preference profile P for this instance that is minimal, in the sense that P is a subset of every other valid partial profile P вҖІ for F , i.e., вҲҖP вҖІ вҲҲ P valid (F ), it holds that Pa вҠҶ P вҖІ 

> a

for all a вҲҲ A. This profile P is defined as follows: Each agent pi вҲҲ P has partial preferences Ppi = {ai вү» aj | j > i }, i.e., pi prefers their optimal matching partner ai over all higher-indexed agents in A. Similarly, for each agent ai вҲҲ A , Pai = {pi вү» pj | j > i }.

Validity of P

By definition, P is compliant with F . To prove that P вҲҲ P valid (F ), we first show that m is a super stable matching in P ,and then show that m is optimal in every completion of P , i.e., any full ranking profile compatible with P .To verify that m(pi) = ai is super stable under the partial preference profile P , consider any pair (pi, a j ) with jМё = i. If 

i > j , then aj prefers their match pj to pi in P , since pj = m(aj ) вү»Paj pi. Thus, (pi, a j ) is not a blocking pair in any completion of P . If j > i , then pi prefers their match ai to aj in P , since ai = m(pi) вү»Ppi aj , and again (pi, a j ) is not blocking m in any completion of P . Hence, no pair blocks m in any completion of P , and m is super stable. We now show that m is also the optimal stable matching in any completion of P , i.e., a pervasive stable matching. For contradiction, assume that this is not the case, and that there exists a full ranking profile F вҖІ compatible with P that admits an optimal stable matching mвҖІМё = m. Because m is super stable, it is also a stable matching in F вҖІ. Now consider some edge 

(pi, a j ) in mвҖІ \ m. Because mвҖІ is assumed to be optimal in F вҖІ, we have that pi is better off under mвҖІ than m and vice versa for 

aj , i.e., aj = mвҖІ(pi) вү»F вҖІ

> pi

m(pi) = ai and pj = m(aj ) вүәF вҖІ

> aj

mвҖІ(aj ) = pi. If i > j this is not compliant with preferences 

pj вү»Paj pi in P . Similarly, if j > i this is not compliant with preferences ai вү»Ppj aj in P . Thus, there cannot exist any edge (pi, a j ) in mвҖІ \ m. This is a contradiction to our choice of F вҖІ and mвҖІ. Hence m is optimal in any full ranking profile compatible with P .Minimality of P

We now prove that P is minimal in the sense that it is a subset of every other valid partial profile P вҖІ for F , i.e., вҲҖP вҖІ вҲҲPvalid (F ), it holds that Pa вҠҶ P вҖІ 

> a

for all a вҲҲ A.To see this, consider that for any valid profile P вҖІ вҲҲ P valid (F ), in order for an edge (pi, a j ) not to block the stable matching 

m in any completion of P вҖІ, we require that either ai вү»P вҖІ

> pi

aj or pj вү»P вҖІ

> aj

pi (not necessarily both). According to F , the former holds only when i < j , and the latter holds only when j < i . Thus: вҖў For all pairs (pi, a j ) with i < j , a valid profile must specify ai вү»pi aj .вҖў For all pairs (pi, a j ) with i > j , a valid profile must specify pj вү»aj pi.These are exactly the relations specified in P . Therefore, P is both valid and minimal with respect to ensuring stability and optimality of m across all completions. 

Lower bound on the expected number of pair samples EОҪ [Npi,a j (П„ )] 

Following Kaufmann et al. [2016], we construct alternative environments to provide lower bounds on the sample counts 

Npi,a i and Nai,p i for any agent pair (pi, a i).We construct our alternative environments based on the preference profile P = {Pa}aвҲҲA defined above. Specifically, since we proved that P is valid and minimal, any completion (or alternative environment) compatible with P will yield the exact same optimal stable matching. Therefore, to create an alternative environment ОҪвҖІ where the optimal stable matching is different, we must construct an environment that is not consistent with P . We achieve this by minimally modifying the reward distribution of only a single pair. We specifically consider alternative instances ОҪвҖІ where the distribution of one agent pi вҲҲ P is modified in only one agent 

aj вҲҲ A :

ОҪвҖІ = ( ОҪp1 , В· В· В· , ОҪ вҖІ 

> pi

, В· В· В· , ОҪ pK (55) 

ОҪa1 , В· В· В· , ОҪ ai , В· В· В· , ОҪ aN ) (56) where 

ОҪвҖІ 

> pi

= ( ОҪpi,a 1 , В· В· В· , ОҪ вҖІ 

> pi,a j

, В· В· В· , ОҪ pi,a N ) (57) with (using Assumption 2): вҖў if j = i then: ОјвҖІ 

> pi,a i

< Ој pi,a i+1 and KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ pi,a i+1 ) < KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ вҖІ 

> pi,a i

) < KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ pi,a i+1 ) + Оұ

вҖў if j > i then: ОјвҖІ 

> pi,a j

> Ој pi,a i and KL (ОҪpi,a j , ОҪ pi,a i ) < KL (ОҪpi,a j , ОҪ вҖІ 

> pi,a j

) < KL (ОҪpi,a j , ОҪ pi,a i ) + Оұ

Note that in every of those alternative instances we have a different optimal stable matching, i.e., mвӢҶОҪМё = mвӢҶОҪвҖІ . Thus, introducing the event E = {mП„ = mвӢҶОҪ }, any Оҙ-PAC algorithm stopping at time П„ with matching mП„ satisfies Pr ОҪ (E) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ

and Pr ОҪвҖІ (E) вүӨ Оҙ .Applying Lemma F.2 on the stopping time П„ for the two matching instances ОҪ and ОҪвҖІ we have that: 

X

> aвҲҲA

X

> iвҲҲOS (a)

EОҪ [Na,i (П„ )] KL (ОҪa,i , ОҪ вҖІ

> a,i

) вүҘ d(PОҪ (E), P ОҪвҖІ (E)) вүҘ d(1 вҲ’ Оҙ, Оҙ )

where Na,i (П„ ) is the number of samples of pair (a, i ) вҲҲ P Г— A until stopping time П„ .Using the lower bound on the binary relative entropy d(1 вҲ’ Оҙ, Оҙ ) вүҘ ln 12.4Оҙ for Оҙ вҲҲ (0 , 1/2) Kaufmann et al. [2016], and the fact that the two different instances ОҪ and ОҪвҖІ differ only in the distribution of one pair, we obtain: 

EОҪ [Npi,a j (П„ )] вүҘ log( 12.4Оҙ ) 1

KL (ОҪpi,a j , ОҪ вҖІ 

> pi,a j

)

Now from the definition of the alternative instances, for i = j:

EОҪ [Npi,a i (П„ )] вүҘ log( 12.4Оҙ ) 1

KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ pi,a i+1 ) + Оұand for j > i :

EОҪ [Npi,a j (П„ )] вүҘ log( 12.4Оҙ ) 1

KL (ОҪpi,a j , ОҪ pi,a i ) + Оұ

Furthermore, for j < i , the definition of P and the construction of the alternative environments imply that pi does not require samples from aj . Consequently: 

EОҪ [Npi,a j (П„ )] = 0 (58) Now following the same reasoning for the agents ai вҲҲ A , by symmetry of the partial preferences P we have that for i = j:

EОҪ [Nai,p i (П„ )] вүҘ log( 12.4Оҙ ) 1

KL (ОҪai,p i , ОҪ ai,p i+1 ) + Оұ

and for j > i :

EОҪ [Nai,p j (П„ )] вүҘ log( 12.4Оҙ ) 1

KL (ОҪai,p j , ОҪ ai,p i ) + Оұ

and for j < i :

EОҪ [Nai,p j (П„ )] = 0 (59) 

p1

p2

p3

Set P

a1

a2

a3

Set A

tk,l 

Figure 6: Illustration of the bipartite graph G.

Lower bound on the number of matchings EОҪ [П„ ]

Finally, we lower bound the number of matchings П„ by analyzing the associated bipartite multigraph G with edge multiplici-ties ti,j , as illustrated in Figure 6. To define the edge multiplicities tk,l , we observe that each pair (pk, a l) must be sampled at least 

max( EОҪ [Npk ,a l (П„ )] , EОҪ [Nak ,p l (П„ )]) . Letting parameter Оұ вҶ’ 0, we have that for k = l:

tk,k = max( EОҪ [Npk ,a k (П„ )] , EОҪ [Nak ,p k (П„ )]) вүҘ log( 12.4Оҙ ) max 

 1

KL (ОҪpk ,a k , ОҪ pk ,a k+1 ) , 1

KL (ОҪak ,p k , ОҪ ak ,p k+1 )



and for k < l , Eq. 59 implies that EОҪ [Nal,p k ] = 0 and thus: 

tk,l = EОҪ [Npk ,a l (П„ )] вүҘ log( 12.4Оҙ ) 1

KL (ОҪpk ,a l , ОҪ pk ,a k )

and for l < k , Eq. 58 implies that EОҪ [Npk ,a l ] = 0 and thus: 

tk,l = EОҪ [Nal,p k (П„ )] вүҘ 1

KL (ОҪal,p k , ОҪ al,p l )

Now according to KЛқ onigвҖҷs Theorem, the number of matchings required to cover the edges of the bipartite multigraph G, is equal to the maximum degree: 

EОҪ [П„ ] = def (G) = max(max  

> piвҲҲP

deg (pi), max  

> aiвҲҲA

deg (ai)) where the degree for agents pi вҲҲ P is: 

deg (pi) = 

> n

X

> j=1

ti,j = ti,i + X

> j<i

ti,j + X

> j>i

ti,j 

вүҘ log 

 12.4Оҙ

 пЈ®пЈ°max 

 1

KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ pi,a i+1 ) , 1

KL (ОҪai,p i , ОҪ ai,p i+1 )



+ X

> j<i

1

KL (ОҪaj ,p i , ОҪ aj ,p j ) + X

> j>i

1

KL (ОҪpi,a j , ОҪ pi,a i )

пЈ№пЈ»

and the degree for agents for ai вҲҲ A :

deg (ai) = 

> n

X

> j=1

tj,i = ti,i + X

> j<i

tj,i + X

> j>i

tj,i 

вүҘ log 

 12.4Оҙ

 пЈ®пЈ°max 

 1

KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ pi,a i+1 ) , 1

KL (ОҪai,p i , ОҪ ai,p i+1 )



+ X

> j<i

1

KL (ОҪpj ,a i , ОҪ pj ,a j ) + X

> j>i

1

KL (ОҪai,p j , ОҪ ai,p i )

пЈ№пЈ»

To conclude we have that: 

EОҪ [П„ ] вүҘ log 

 12.4Оҙ



max(max  

> piвҲҲP

Ai, max  

> aiвҲҲA

Bi) (60) where, 

Ai = max 

 1

KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ pi,a i+1 ) , 1

KL (ОҪai,p i , ОҪ ai,p i+1 )



+ X

> j<i

1

KL (ОҪaj ,p i , ОҪ aj ,p j ) + X

> j>i

1

KL (ОҪpi,a j , ОҪ pi,a i )

and 

Bi = max 

 1

KL (ОҪpi,a i , ОҪ pi,a i+1 ) , 1

KL (ОҪai,p i , ОҪ ai,p i+1 )



+ X

> j<i

1

KL (ОҪpj ,a i , ОҪ pj ,a j ) + X

> j>i

1

KL (ОҪai,p j , ОҪ ai,p i )

## H ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS 

We present additional results for the pure exploration setting in markets with different numbers of agents on the two sides. Specifically, we fix the number of arms to K = 10 and vary the number of agents N from 2 to 50 . For each value of N , we run 20 independent instances generated as in the main experiment. As shown in Figure 7, the observations from Section 7.1 continue to hold across different market sizes. Figure 7: Sample complexity as a function of the number of players N , with K = 10 fixed.