Title: Covariate Selection for Doubly Robust Double/debiased Machine Learning Estimators for Causal Inference

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.17238v1

Published Time: Wed, 16 Sep 2026 01:20:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
Covariate Selection for Doubly Robust Double/debiased Machine Learning Estimators for Causal Inference 

Muwon Kwon and Peter M. Steiner Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology University of Maryland, College Park 

Author Note 

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Muwon Kwon, Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, email: mwkwon21@umd.edu. arXiv:2609.17238v1 [stat.ME] 15 Sep 2026 COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 1

Abstract 

High-dimensional data create challenges for causal effect estimation because identifying the covariates needed for correct model specification becomes increasingly difficult. Double/debiased machine learning (DML) facilitates the use of machine learning (ML) for causal inference by mitigating regularization and overfitting bias, but comparatively less attention has been given to covariate selection in relation to the double robustness (DR) property possessed by some DML estimators. In particular, ML-based covariate selection may result in differential covariate selection or in misspecification of both models, thereby limiting the practical utility of the DR property. To address these issues, we propose using the union of the covariates selected by the propensity score (PS) and outcome ML models to re-estimate both models. Simulation results show that using the union consistently reduces more confounding bias than using separate selected covariate sets. The results also show that ML-based estimation does not uniformly outperform conventional DR estimation, even under conditions favorable to the Lasso, and that post-Lasso reduces more confounding bias than standard Lasso. These findings demonstrate that successful use of ML for causal inference depends not only on the ML algorithm but also on how the information obtained through covariate selection is incorporated into causal effect estimation. 

Keywords : covariate selection, double/debiased machine learning, doubly robust estimation, Lasso, union set COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 2

Covariate Selection for Doubly Robust Double/debiased Machine Learning Estimators for Causal Inference Introduction 

The consistent estimation of causal effects from observational studies requires a set of observed covariates that removes all confounding bias (unconfoundedness assumption; Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983). In high-dimensional settings where the number of covariates is large relative to the sample size, it becomes demanding to select such a covariate set and correctly specify the functional form of the outcome model. To address the difficulty with high-dimensional data, researchers have been relying on machine learning (ML) methods such as the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso; Tibshirani, 1996) because they automate covariate selection and provide a systematic framework for learning the conditional expectation function from the data (Belloni, Chernozhukov, & Hansen, 2014). However, the common practice of applying ML only to the outcome model to estimate effects of interest faces two sources of bias: (1) regularization bias and (2) overfitting bias, which prevent the ML-based effect estimators from achieving 

√n-consistency, where n is the sample size (Chernozhukov et al., 2018). Regularization constrains model complexity by imposing penalties on the estimation procedure to prevent a model from fitting the training data extremely well, thereby improving out-of-sample prediction. 1 Consequently, the regularization keeps the variance of the estimator from inflating but also necessarily induces bias in the estimator. Overfitting bias occurs when the same sample used to estimate the treatment selection and outcome models is also used to estimate the causal effect. 2 When the two models are estimated using ML methods, they   

> 1For example, the penalty term of the Lasso reduces the complexity of the model by shrinking the overall magnitude of the estimated coefficients towards zero, with some coefficients being shrunk exactly to zero. Also, random forest regularizes the model by limiting the correlation among individual trees through bootstrap sampling and random feature selection, and then averaging their predictions to reduce variance and improve generalization.
> 2In the ML literature, the treatment selection and outcome models are commonly referred to as nuisance models, whereas the causal effect is referred to as the target parameter.

COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 3may overfit the estimation sample by capturing not only the underlying systematic relationships but also idiosyncratic noise specific to the sample. If the same observations are subsequently used to estimate the causal effect, this sample-specific overfitting may influence the estimated causal effect, resulting in biased estimates. To address issues due to regularization and overfitting with high-dimensional data and to obtain √n-consistent effect estimators, Chernozhukov et al. (2018) proposed double/debiased ML (DML). DML mitigates the impact of the regularization bias by constructing estimators that are locally insensitive to small estimation errors in the treatment selection and outcome models, a property known as Neyman orthogonality (Neyman, 1959). This local insensitivity limits the impact of the regularization bias on the causal effect estimators when the estimation errors in the two models converge to zero sufficiently fast. To mitigate overfitting bias, DML employs sample splitting, ensuring that the treatment selection and outcome models are estimated using one subset of the data, while the causal effect is estimated using a separate, non-overlapping subset. This separation of samples reduces the extent to which sample-specific overfitting in the two estimated models influences the causal effect estimate. Because DML enables √n-consistent estimation of the causal effect despite estimation errors in the estimated treatment selection and outcome models, it has become an increasingly popular framework for estimating causal effects in high-dimensional settings (Chernozhukov, Hansen, Kallus, Spindler, & Syrgkanis, 2024; Hünermund, Louw, & Caspi, 2023; Valentin, Detommaso, Li, Opper, & Brückner, 2025). In addition to this primary and well-established convergence-rate property shared by all DML estimators, there is another robustness property exhibited by some DML estimators that has not yet been explicitly emphasized in the DML literature: the double robustness (DR; also referred to as doubly robust) property (Chernozhukov et al., 2024; Valentin et al., 2025). The DR property ensures consistency of the estimator if either the treatment selection model or the outcome model is correctly specified (Glynn & Quinn, 2010; Robins & Rotnitzky, 1995, 2001; COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 4Robins, Rotnitzky, & Zhao, 1994; Scharfstein, Rotnitzky, & Robins, 1999; Tsiatis, 2006). That is, the DR property offers protection against model misspecification because it provides two opportunities to remove confounding bias, either by correctly specifying the treatment selection model or the outcome model relative to the joint covariate set that meets unconfoundedness. Correct specification of these models involves two aspects: the selection of covariates to be controlled for and the functional form of the models. This article focuses exclusively on identifying appropriate covariate sets for doubly robust DML (DR-DML) estimators. Accordingly, we do not address the specification of the functional forms of the two models, assuming that in high-dimensional settings, their functional forms can be adequately estimated using ML methods. Although the DR property provides protection against model misspecification, current implementation of DML may limit the practical utility of the DR property because of two issues arising from incorrect covariate selection: (1) differential covariate selection (Steiner & Lyu, 2024) and (2) misspecification of both the treatment selection and outcome models. Differential covariate selection refers to the situation in which the treatment selection and outcome models of DR estimators adjust for different sets of covariates. Under differential covariate selection, the DR property may not hold even when one or both models would be correctly specified on their own because the seemingly correctly specified model is always kept blind to any amplification-bias or collider-bias-inducing misspecifications of the respective other model. When ML methods are used to estimate the treatment selection and outcome models in high-dimensional settings, differential covariate selection may commonly arise even when both models are specified using the same initial set of covariates because ML methods rarely select exactly the same subset of covariates for both models. Moreover, in practice it is much more likely that both models are misspecified, that is, each model fails to remove the entire confounding bias. In this case the DR property no longer provides complete protection against model misspecification (though using a DR estimator might often nonetheless be beneficial even COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 5though not all bias is removed). This may occur even when the covariate sets initially included in the treatment selection and outcome ML models contain all covariates needed for approximately correct specification of at least one model. Because the ML performance for covariate selection depends on factors such as sample size and the choice of tuning parameters, ML methods may fail to select all covariates necessary for correct model specification from the initial covariates that meet unconfoundedness. To avoid or at least mitigate bias arising from incorrect covariate selection with DR-DML estimators, we propose using the union of the two model-specific covariate sets to re-estimate the treatment selection and outcome ML models. The union of the covariate sets is used in the double selection approach (Belloni et al., 2014) to ensure that important covariates for both models are included in the outcome model, thereby mitigating omitted-variable bias when estimating the causal effect. However, the primary emphasis of the double selection approach is on applying Lasso to both the treatment selection and outcome models, rather than on exploiting the role of the union itself in model specification. Consequently, the use of the union in double selection is limited to the particular model specification and data-generating process (DGP) considered. Specifically, the union is used only to specify the final outcome model under a DGP that assumes a constant treatment effect. Beyond this limited use of the union in the double selection, we fully leverage the distinct advantages of DR-DML estimators and the union set of selected covariates for causal effect estimation. In DR-DML estimators, after covariate sets are selected separately for the treatment selection and outcome models using their respective ML methods, we re-estimate both models using the union of the selected covariate sets. Using the union eliminates differential covariate selection, thereby allowing each model to account for collider-bias-inducing or bias-amplifying misspecifications arising from covariates selected by the other model. In addition, the union increases the likelihood that at least one model includes the covariates necessary for approximately correct specification, thereby helping COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 6preserve the DR property. In particular, using the union may allow the DR property to hold even when both models are misspecified based on their respective selected covariate sets. Although neither selected covariate set may correctly specify its corresponding model, the union of the two sets may be sufficient to correctly specify at least one of them. re-estimating both models using the union therefore provides an additional opportunity for at least one model to be correctly specified, thereby preserving the DR property. In this study, we use the Lasso as the ML method because it is one of the most widely used approaches for automated covariate selection (Belloni, Chen, Chernozhukov, & Hansen, 2012; Belloni, Chernozhukov, & Hansen, 2011; Belloni et al., 2014) and has played a foundational role in the theoretical development of DML (Chernozhukov et al., 2024). By focusing on the Lasso, we explicitly distinguish the respective advantages of DR-DML estimation and the union of selected covariates and examine how these advantages can be combined for ATE estimation. Our primary emphasis in this study is on reducing confounding bias in finite samples rather than on the asymptotic √n-consistency of the estimators, although the proposed approach is designed to preserve the √n-consistency of DR-DML estimators. Beyond demonstrating the benefits of DR-DML estimation and the use of the union set, this study also provides insight into when ML-based covariate selection is beneficial and when it may be unnecessary or even undesirable. As the use of ML methods has become increasingly widespread, there is a risk of implicitly assuming that ML-based procedures necessarily yield more reliable causal effect estimates than conventional methods. Our simulation results help clarify the conditions under which ML-based covariate selection provides practical advantages and those under which conventional estimation remains preferable. We further examine the advantage of post-Lasso estimation, which mitigates the shrinkage induced by the Lasso by re-estimating the model using the selected covariates without penalization. Although the advantages of post-Lasso over Lasso have been well established (Belloni & Chernozhukov, 2013), the two approaches are often COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 7used or discussed interchangeably in applied research. In the simulation study, we compare standard Lasso and post-Lasso within the same DR-DML framework and show that post-Lasso yields a greater reduction in confounding bias than standard Lasso. 

Double/debiased Machine Learning 

Chernozhukov et al. (2018) proposed DML to address two major sources of bias that arise when ML methods are used for causal effect estimation: regularization bias and overfitting bias. This section briefly describes why these biases arise and how DML addresses them. In our discussions, we particularly focus on regularization bias because the DML strategy used to avoid this bias is more directly related to the DR property of DML estimators—our primary focus. Readers interested in more detailed explanations of regularization and overfitting bias, including technical derivations and formal results, are referred to Chernozhukov et al. (2018, 2024). To formalize ideas, we consider the estimation of the average treatment effect (ATE) under a DGP with heterogeneous treatment effects: 

Y = g(Z, X) + U, E[U |X, Z ] = 0 ,Z = m(X) + V, E[V |X] = 0 ,

(1) where Y is the outcome, Z is a binary treatment indicator with Z = 1 denoting treatment and Z = 0 denoting control condition, and X is a set of observed confounders that satisfies the unconfoundedness assumption. U and V are additive disturbances. The confounders X

influence both treatment assignment and the outcome through two respective models: the propensity score (PS) function m(X) = P(Z = 1 | X) for treatment assignment and the potentially nonlinear outcome function g(Z, X) = E[Y | Z, X] for the outcome. The target parameter of interest is the ATE: 

θ = E[g(1 , X) − g(0 , X)] , (2) COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 8that is, the expected difference in the predicted treatment and control outcomes. 

Regularization and Overfitting Bias in ML-based Causal Inference 

Regularization Bias 

When estimating the ATE via ML with high-dimensional data, a naive approach is to estimate the ATE θ using only the outcome model in Equation 1 while ignoring the selection model. However, while applying ML to the outcome model offers flexible and accurate predictions of the outcome, it does not imply that one obtains an unbiased estimator for the ATE. Suppose the outcome model g(Z, X) in Equation 1 is estimated using a regularized ML method. Then, the regression estimator can be decomposed as follows: 

ˆg(z, X) = g(z, X) + δg(z, X), (3) where δg(z, X) denotes the estimation error. When a regularized ML method is used, this estimation error has non-zero mean because regularization results in a systematic error component. Regularization controls model complexity by imposing penalties, restrictions, or other constraints on the estimation procedure to obtain a more parsimonious model that avoids overfitting and, therefore, results in improved predictive performance on out-of-sample observations. For example, the Lasso regularizes a regression model by imposing a penalty that shrinks estimated coefficients toward zero and sets some coefficients exactly to zero. Random forests control model complexity and reduce prediction variance through averaging across trees constructed from bootstrap samples and randomly sampled subsets of predictors. Although regularization prevents the variance of an ML estimator from becoming excessively large, it introduces systematic bias into the estimator. This bias arising from regularization is referred to as regularization bias .Consequently, the estimator ˆg(z, X) is biased for g(z, X), with bias given by E [δg(z, X)] .The impact of regularization bias in the regression estimator ˆg(z, X) on the ML-based ATE estimator ˆθML can be illustrated analytically using the formulation in COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 9Chernozhukov et al. (2018). 3 Suppose that the ATE is estimated using ˆg(z, X). The resulting plug-in estimator is 

ˆθML = En[ˆ g(1 , X) − ˆg(0 , X)] = En[g(1 , X) + δg(1 , X)] − En[g(0 , X) + δg(0 , X)] ,

(4) where the last equality follows from the decomposition in Equation 3. Then the overall estimation error of the ML estimator ˆθML can be decomposed as follows: 

ˆθML − θ = En[g(1 , X) + δg(1 , X)] − En[g(0 , X) + δg(0 , X)] − E[g(1 , X) − g(0 , X)] = En[g(1 , X) − g(0 , X)] − E[g(1 , X) − g(0 , X)] 

| {z }

> sampling error

+ En[δg(1 , X) − δg(0 , X)] 

| {z }

> first order estimation error

. (5) The first term captures sampling error arising from replacing the population expectation with its empirical counterpart. The sampling error term has mean zero and typically converges to zero at the rate n−1/2, which is compatible with √n-consistent estimation. The second term captures the estimation error in the outcome regression. Recall that 

δg(z, X), for z = 0 , 1, contains a systematic component induced by regularization and therefore has a non-zero mean. Moreover, δg(z, X) converges to zero at a rate slower than 

n−1/2. Because this error enters the plug-in ATE estimator at first order—that is, linearly—its slower convergence rate directly carries over to the ATE estimator, thereby preventing √n-consistent estimation of the ATE. Taking the expectation of Equation 5 eliminates the mean-zero sampling-error term, yielding the bias of the ML estimator: E[ˆθML ] − θ = E[δg(1 , X) − δg(0 , X)] . (6) Equation 6 shows that the bias of the ML estimator is directly determined by first order regularization bias of the outcome regression estimator.  

> 3The DML literature (Chernozhukov et al., 2018, 2024) discusses regularization bias in the context of semi-parametric score functions. Here, we illustrate the same issue using the simpler plug-in estimator.

COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 10 

Overfitting Bias 

Overfitting bias occurs when the same sample used to estimate the PS and outcome models, g(Z, X) and m(X), is also used to estimate the causal effect θ. When the two models are estimated using ML methods, they tend to overfit the estimation sample by capturing not only the underlying systematic relationships but also the sample-specific noise. If the same data are subsequently used to estimate the causal effect, this sample-specific overfitting potentially biases the causal effect estimate. 

Mitigating Regularization Bias 

DML mitigates the impact of regularization bias and other first order estimation errors by constructing estimators that incorporate not only the outcome model but also the PS model. For the DGP specified in Equation 1, the corresponding DML estimator is constructed as follows 4 (Belloni et al., 2014; Chernozhukov et al., 2018): 

ˆθDR-DML = En

"

ˆg(1 , X) − ˆg(0 , X) + Z(Y − ˆg(1 , X)) ˆm(X) − (1 − Z)( Y − ˆg(0 , X)) 1 − ˆm(X)

#

. (7) Note that we use the acronym DR-DML to denote this estimator because it takes the well-established augmented inverse probability weighting (AIPW; Robins & Rotnitzky, 2001; Robins et al., 1994; Scharfstein et al., 1999) form, which possesses the DR property discussed in detail in the following sections. Accordingly, this estimator may be referred to as either the DML estimator or the DR-DML estimator. In this section, however, we use the term DML estimator to focus on its role in mitigating regularization and overfitting bias, and reserve the term DR-DML estimator for the subsequent sections after introducing its DR property. While the ML estimator in Equation 4 is constructed using only the outcome model,  

> 4Under a DGP that assumes a constant treatment effect, DML estimators are constructed differently. For details, see (Chernozhukov et al., 2018, 2024).

COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 11 the DML estimator in Equation 7 relies on both the PS and outcome models. Analogous to the decomposition in Equation 3, an ML-based PS estimator, ˆm(X), can also be decomposed: 

ˆm(X) = m(X) + δm(X), (8) where δm(X) denotes the estimation error in the PS estimator. As before, this estimation error has a non-zero mean due to a systematic component induced by regularization. Thus, 

ˆm(X) is biased for m(X), with bias given by E [δm(X)] . Substituting the two decompositions of the PS and outcome estimators from Equations 3 and 8 into the ATE estimator in Equation 7 yields 

ˆθDR-DML = En

"

g(1 , X) + δg(1 , X) − g(0 , X) − δg(0 , X)+ Z{Y − g(1 , X) − δg(1 , X)}

m(X) + δm(X) − (1 − Z){Y − g(0 , X) − δg(0 , X)}

1 − m(X) − δm(X)

#

.

(9) Then the bias of the ATE estimator ˆθDR-DML is given by (see the Appendix for details): E[ˆθDR-DML ] − θ = E

 δg(1 , X)δm(X)

m(X) + δm(X) + δg(0 , X)δm(X)1 − m(X) − δm(X)



. (10) The equation highlights that the bias of the DML estimator depends on the products of the estimation errors in the PS and outcome estimators. Because of the multiplication of independent errors, their joint bias contribution is of second order and, therefore, converges to zero faster than either first order estimation error alone. Consequently, even when each estimator individually converges at a rate slower than n−1/2, the DML estimator can remain √n-consistent as long as the product of the two estimation errors converges to zero at the rate n−1/2 or faster. For example, even if the estimation errors in both the PS and outcome regression estimators converge at the rate n−1/4, their product converges at the rate n−1/4 × n−1/4 = n−1/2. This insensitivity to estimation errors in the two models arises from Neyman orthogonality (Neyman, 1959) of the underlying score function. For detailed COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 12 treatments of Neyman orthogonality, including formal derivations and mathematical proofs, see Chernozhukov et al. (2018, 2024). 

Removing Overfitting Bias 

To remove overfitting bias, DML employs sample splitting, ensuring that the PS and outcome models are estimated using one subset of the data, while the causal effect is estimated using a separate, non-overlapping subset. This separation of samples reduces the extent to which sample-specific overfitting in the two estimated models influences the causal effect estimate. While sample splitting prevents overfitting bias in the estimators, its direct application can lead to a substantial loss of efficiency because the causal effect is estimated using only a subset of the available data. This inefficiency can be addressed through cross-fitting, in which the roles of the separate samples are reversed to obtain additional estimates of the causal effect. Averaging these estimates allows all observations to contribute to the final estimate, thereby recovering much of the efficiency lost through sample splitting (Chernozhukov et al., 2018). 

Double Robustness of DML Estimators 

As briefly mentioned above, the DML estimator in Equation 7 is not only 

√n-consistent, a property arising from Neyman orthogonality that makes the estimator insensitive to small estimation errors in both the PS and outcome models, but also possesses the DR property. The DR property ensures consistency of the estimator if either the PS model or the outcome model is correctly specified with regard to a joint covariate set X that establishes unconfoundedness (Glynn & Quinn, 2010; Robins & Rotnitzky, 1995, 2001; Robins et al., 1994; Scharfstein et al., 1999; Steiner & Lyu, 2024; Tsiatis, 2006). 5 That is, the DR property offers protection against model misspecification by  

> 5Neyman orthogonality can be viewed as a form of robustness because it makes the estimator insensitive to small perturbations in the estimated PS and outcome models. However, to follow the terminology commonly used in the DML literature (Chernozhukov et al., 2018, 2024), we distinguish the local insensitivity property from the DR property throughout this article.

COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 13 providing two opportunities to remove the entire confounding bias, either by correctly specifying the PS model or the outcome model. Because of this robustness to model misspecification, DR estimation has been widely used in causal inference (Bang & Robins, 2005; Glynn & Quinn, 2010; Imbens & Wooldridge, 2009; Schafer & Kang, 2008). The DR property of the DML estimator in Equation 7 can be expressed as follows: 

bθDR-DML 

> p

−→ θ if bg(z, Rg) p

−→ g(z, X) or bm(Rm) p

−→ m(X), (11) where Rg and Rm denote the covariate sets used to specify the outcome and PS models, respectively. Thus, consistency of the DR-DML estimator requires that at least one of the two models be correctly specified with regard to X. Proofs of this result can be found in Glynn and Quinn (2010) or Tsiatis (2006). Note that the correct specification of a model involves two aspects: the correct selection of covariates R to be controlled for and the correct specification of the functional relation bg(.) or bm(.), respectively. Thus, a correctly specified model must control for a set of covariates that satisfies unconfoundedness and correctly capture the functional relationship between the dependent variable and the covariates and address bias-inducing misspecification arising from the misspecified model. In this study, we focus on the DR property within the DML framework in high-dimensional settings, with particular emphasis on covariate selection. Accordingly, we do not consider potential misspecification of the functional forms of the PS and outcome models. Importantly, not all DML estimators possess the DR property. Neyman orthogonality and DR are distinct properties: Neyman orthogonality does not, by itself, imply DR, nor does DR necessarily imply Neyman orthogonality. A DML estimator has the DR property only when its underlying score function possesses the DR property. For example, DML estimators for DGPs with constant treatment effects employ score functions that satisfy Neyman orthogonality but do not have the DR property (Chernozhukov et al., 2018). This distinction is important because the terms Neyman orthogonality and the DR COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 14 property are sometimes used interchangeably in discussions of DML, which can lead to the misconception that all DML estimators have the DR property. For a detailed discussion of the DR property of the DML estimators, see Chernozhukov et al. (2024); Valentin et al. (2025). 

Challenges of Covariate Selection in ML-Based DR Estimation 

Although the DR property of the DML estimator ensures consistency if either the PS model or the outcome model is correctly specified, identifying the covariates needed for correct specification can still be challenging in practice. In particular, two major issues may potentially arise from incorrect covariate selection: (1) differential covariate selection (Steiner & Lyu, 2024), which refers to the situation in which the PS and outcome models adjust for different sets of covariates, and (2) misspecification of both models, which refers to the situation in which each covariate set selected for the respective model fails to contain all covariates necessary for correct model specification. These two problems are commonly encountered in practice, regardless of whether ML methods are used. When ML methods are not used, these problems are primarily related to the quality and validity of the subject-matter knowledge researchers have about the underlying true DGP. However, when ML methods are used, which is the focus of this article, these problems may arise not only from limitations in subject-matter knowledge but also from the covariate selection procedures employed by the ML methods. To illustrate these challenges, suppose that we estimate the ATE under the DGP in Equation 1 using double post-Lasso (Belloni et al., 2014), which applies post-Lasso (Belloni & Chernozhukov, 2013) separately to the PS and outcome models. Post-Lasso builds on the Lasso by separating covariate selection from subsequent model estimation. The Lasso penalty shrinks estimated coefficients toward zero, setting some exactly to zero and thereby selecting covariates. Post-Lasso removes this shrinkage by re-estimating the models without penalization using the covariates selected by the initial Lasso, with logistic COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 15 regression for the PS model and ordinary least squares (OLS) for the outcome model. Suppose that, based on reasonable subject-matter theory, we initially include the covariate set X that satisfies unconfoundedness in both the PS and outcome regression Lasso models. The procedure for estimating the ATE is then implemented as follows: Box 1: Estimation Procedure of Double Post-Lasso 1. Covariate selection using the Lasso. • For the PS model m(X).(a) Fit a logistic Lasso regression of Z on X.(b) Identify the selected covariates XPS ⊂ X with non-zero coefficients. • For the outcome model g(z, X) for z = 0 , 1.(a) Fit a Lasso regression of Yz on X.(b) Identify the selected covariates XYz ⊂ X with non-zero coefficients. 2. Re-estimation using the selected covariate set. • For the PS model m(X).(a) Fit a logistic regression of Z on XPS .(b) Predict the PSs using the selected set: ˆZ = ˆ m(XPS ).• For the outcome model g(z, X) for z = 0 , 1.(a) Fit an OLS regression of Yz on XYz .(b) Predict the outcomes using the selected set: ˆYz = ˆ g(z, XYz ).3. Estimation of the ATE by plugging the predicted values ˆm(XPS ) and ˆg(z, XYz )

into Equation 7. In the procedure described in Box 1, the re-estimation step represents the key distinction of the post-Lasso approach. If the PSs and outcomes are predicted directly from the fitted COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 16 Lasso models without this re-estimation step, the procedure corresponds to the double Lasso approach (Belloni et al., 2014). 

Differential Covariate Selection 

In the double post-Lasso procedure described in Box 1, if the PS and outcome models end up controlling for different covariate sets (i.e., XPS ̸ = XYz ), the DR property may not hold even if one or both models are correctly specified. This occurs because the seemingly correctly specified model is always kept blind to any collider-bias-inducing or bias-amplifying misspecifications of the respective other model (Steiner & Lyu, 2024). For example, consider a DGP that differs from the one in Equation 1, in which the treatment indicator is affected by both confounders and instrumental variables. In this DGP, suppose that the PS model is correctly specified by controlling for all confounders required to satisfy unconfoundedness, whereas the outcome model is misspecified because it omits some confounders while including instrumental variables that are not included in the PS model. Then, the PS estimator is unbiased, whereas the outcome regression estimator is biased because of the omitted confounders, with the bias further amplified by conditioning on the instrumental variables (Steiner & Kim, 2016). In this case, although the PS model is correctly specified, the DR property does not hold, resulting in biased effect estimates. This occurs because the PS model fails to account for the additional bias that is amplified when the outcome model conditions on the instrumental variables. Consequently, although the PS model successfully removes the bias induced by the confounders, it remains blind to the bias-amplifying misspecification in the outcome model. For further examples and detailed explanations of differential covariate selection, see Steiner and Lyu (2024). Although the PS and outcome regression Lasso models initially include the common covariate set X, the two models may end up adjusting for different sets of covariates because ML methods rarely select exactly the same subset of covariates for both models due COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 17 to, for instance, differences in the predictive strength of covariates across the two models. 6

Misspecification of Both PS and Outcome Models 

While differential covariate selection can be problematic even when one or both of the PS and outcome models are correctly specified, correct specification of at least one model is not always guaranteed in practice. In other words, both models may be misspecified, in which case the DR property no longer provides protection against model misspecification. In the double post-Lasso procedure described in Box 1, even when the initially included covariate set X is sufficient for approximately correct specification of at least one model, the selected covariate sets, XPS and XYz , may fail to retain all covariates necessary for such specification of their respective models. Whether this occurs depends on the performance of the corresponding Lasso models, which may be affected by several factors, including sample size, the approximate sparsity assumption, and the choice of the penalty parameter. 7

Using Union of Covariate Sets for Doubly Robust DML Estimators 

Given that these two issues arising from incorrect covariate selection may prevent the DR property from holding in practice, we address both to increase the likelihood that the DR property is preserved in DR-DML estimation. In particular, we propose using the 

union of the covariate sets selected by the PS and outcome regression ML models to re-estimate both models. The union set is used in the double selection approach (Belloni et al., 2014), in which the primary strategy is to apply Lasso separately to the PS and        

> 6Differential covariate selection is more likely to occur when the initially included covariate sets differ between the PS and outcome regression Lasso models. Such a specification can be desirable because using a smaller subset of covariates in the PS model can help maintain covariate overlap (i.e., the positivity assumption), whereas the outcome model should include all covariates predictive of the outcome to improve the efficiency of the treatment effect estimator (Cho & Yang, 2024; De Luna, Waernbaum, & Richardson, 2011; Glynn & Quinn, 2010; Koch, Vock, & Wolfson, 2018; Lunceford & Davidian, 2004; Vansteelandt, Bekaert, & Claeskens, 2012; Witte & Didelez, 2019).
> 7Also, because the true DGP is rarely known, the initially included covariate set Xfor both models may not be sufficient to approximately specify their respective models. In such cases, the final covariate sets selected by the Lasso ( XPS and XYz) are even less likely to be sufficient for approximate specification.

COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 18 outcome models. The covariates selected by the two Lasso models are combined into a union set, which is used to re-estimate the final outcome model. In this way, covariates selected as important for either the PS or outcome model are retained in the final regression, thereby reducing the risk of omitted-variable bias in treatment effect estimation. However, the role of the union in double selection is limited to DGPs with constant treatment effects. The double selection approach does not use the union under DGPs with heterogeneous treatment effects. Under heterogeneous treatment effects, ATE estimation instead follows the procedure described in Box 1, in which the PS and outcome models are re-estimated using their separately selected covariate sets. Consequently, this procedure remains susceptible to the two problems arising from incorrect covariate selection discussed above. This distinction highlights that, in double selection, the union primarily serves as a mechanism for integrating the covariate selection results from the two Lasso models under DGPs with constant treatment effects, rather than as a general strategy for re-estimating both the PS and outcome models to increase the likelihood that the DR property holds. Our proposal is to distinguish the respective advantages of DR-DML estimators and the union set and to combine them explicitly in ATE estimation. Specifically, we use the union set to re-estimate both the PS and outcome models, with the goal of addressing the two problems arising from incorrect covariate selection and, in turn, increasing the likelihood that the DR property holds. Suppose again that we estimate the ATE under the DGP in Equation 1 using the double post-Lasso approach, but now incorporating the union set. As before, we initially include the covariate set X that meets unconfoundedness in both the PS and outcome regression Lasso models. The estimation procedure using the union set of covariates is then implemented as follows: COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 19 Box 2: Estimation Procedure of Double Post-Lasso Using the Union Set 1. Covariate selection using the Lasso. • For the PS model m(X).(a) Fit a logistic Lasso regression of Z on X.(b) Identify the selected covariates XPS ⊂ X with non-zero coefficients. • For the outcome model g(z, X) for z = 0 , 1.(a) Fit a Lasso regression of Yz on X.(b) Identify the selected covariates XYz ⊂ X with non-zero coefficients. 2. Construction of the union set: XUnion = XPS ∪ XY0 ∪ XY1 .3. Re-estimation using the union set. • For the PS model m(X).(a) Fit a logistic regression of Z on XUnion .(b) Predict the PSs using the union set: ˆZ = ˆ m(XUnion ).• For the outcome model g(z, X) for z = 0 , 1.(a) Fit an OLS regression of Yz on XUnion .(b) Predict the outcomes using the union set: ˆYz = ˆ g(z, XUnion ).4. Estimation of the ATE by plugging the predicted values ˆm(XUnion ) and 

ˆg(z, XUnion ) into Equation 7. The covariate selection steps for the PS and outcome models are identical to those in the estimation procedure using separate covariate sets described in Box 1. The primary difference is the construction of the union set, XUnion = XPS ∪ XY0 ∪ XY1 . After constructing the union set, the PS and outcome models are re-estimated using the same union set. COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 20 Because the PS and outcome models are re-estimated using the same union set, differential covariate selection no longer occurs. In addition, using the union set increases the likelihood that both models include important covariates needed to remove confounding bias. In particular, the use of the union set allows the DR property to hold even when both models are misspecified based on their respective selected covariate sets. For example, suppose that both selected sets XPS and XYz are insufficient to correctly specify their respective models, whereas the union set XUnion is sufficient to correctly specify at least one model. In this case, the double post-Lasso procedure described in Box 1 fails to remove confounding bias because both models remain misspecified. In contrast, the double post-Lasso procedure using the union set described in Box 2 provides an additional opportunity for at least one model to be correctly specified, thereby removing confounding bias through the DR property. 

Simulation Data-Generating Model 

In the simulation study, we demonstrate the advantages of using the union set for DR-DML estimation relative to using separate covariate sets for the PS and outcome models. Beyond this primary contribution, the simulation also provides two additional insights. First, by comparing conventional DR estimation with ML-based approaches, we identify conditions under which ML-based covariate selection is beneficial and conditions under which it may be unnecessary or even undesirable. Second, we demonstrate the advantages of post-Lasso over standard Lasso, showing that re-estimating the selected models without penalization can further reduce confounding bias by removing the shrinkage imposed on the estimated coefficients. To address these objectives, we estimated the ATE across a series of simulation scenarios that vary the specification of the PS and outcome models, as well as conditions affecting the performance of Lasso-based covariate selection. We generated the data according to the DGP with heterogeneous treatment COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 21 

Figure 1 

Causal graph of the data-generating process for treatment Z and outcome Y

effects specified in Equation 1, extended to include two independent sets of confounders, as depicted in the causal graph in Figure 1. In the graph, Y denotes the outcome, Z is a binary treatment indicator with Z = 1 denoting treatment and Z = 0 denoting control, and A = ( Ak)pk=1 and B = ( Bk)pk=1 are two p-dimensional sets of observed confounders that jointly satisfy the unconfoundedness assumption. Thus, adjustment for both sets, 

S = {A, B}, removes the entire confounding bias. The covariates in both confounder sets were independently sampled from a uniform distribution over [−1, 1] . The uniform distribution was chosen to avoid extreme PSs and lack of overlap. The treatment indicator 

Z follows a Bernoulli distribution with probability determined by the logistic model 

p = P(Z = 1 |A, B) = 1 /[1 + exp {− β′ 

> Z

(A + B)}, and the outcomes follow the linear model 

Y = Z + β′ 

> Y

(A + B) + β′ 

> Y Z

Z(A + B) + ε, with ε ∼ N (0 , σ 2). The inclusion of treatment-confounders interactions allows heterogeneous treatment effects. We generated the data so that the confounding bias attributable to each set of confounders is comparable across the PS and outcome models. Allowing the two sets to induce substantially different amounts of confounding bias could itself affect the extent to which each approach reduces bias, introducing an additional source of variation that is beyond the focus of the present study. Three sample-size conditions were considered: n = 500 , 2000 , and 10000 . For the number of covariates, two conditions were considered: p = 50 and 150 , corresponding to total numbers of covariates of 2p = 100 and 300 , respectively, across the two confounder COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 22 sets. For effective covariate selection, the Lasso relies on the approximate sparsity assumption, under which a relatively small number of covariates have substantial predictive contributions while the remaining covariates have progressively smaller contributions. Approximate sparsity requires that the ordered absolute values of the coefficients decay sufficiently rapidly. To investigate how the rate of coefficient decay affects the resulting causal effect estimators, the coefficients ( βZ , βY , and βY Z ) were generated as positive values that decay at different rates. Specifically, for each coefficient vector, the jth largest coefficient βj was specified to decrease as a function of j. For βZ,j ∈ βZ and βY,j ∈ βY , the coefficients were specified as βZ,j = βY,j = 1 /j r, with j = 1 , . . . , p , where r denotes the coefficient decay rate. The coefficients for the treatment-by-confounder interaction, 

βY Z,j ∈ βY Z , were specified as βY Z,j = 1 /(p + j)r for j = 1 , . . . , p . Given that the approximate sparsity assumption is satisfied when r > 0.5 (Chernozhukov et al., 2024), two values of the decay rate were considered: r = 0 .51 and 1, representing conditions that marginally satisfy, and more strongly satisfy the approximate sparsity condition, respectively. 

Estimation of Average Treatment Effect 

Based on the specified data-generating model, we generated 2000 datasets for each simulation condition. For each dataset, the ATE was estimated using the DR-DML estimator in Equation 7 under four different approaches. The first approach is conventional DR estimation, which estimates the ATE without using the Lasso. Under this approach, the PS model is estimated using logistic regression and the outcome model is estimated using the OLS linear regression. The second approach is doubly robust double Lasso, in which the Lasso is used to estimate both the PS and outcome models. Rather than re-estimating the two models using the covariates selected by the Lasso, the PSs and outcomes are predicted directly from the two fitted Lasso models with shrunken COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 23 coefficients. The third approach is the doubly robust double post-Lasso procedure described in Box 1, in which the PS and outcome models are re-estimated using the covariates selected separately from each Lasso model. The fourth approach is the doubly robust double post-Lasso procedure using the union set, described in Box 2, in which both models are re-estimated using the union of the covariates selected by the PS and outcome models. For the three Lasso-based approaches, the penalty level (i.e., tuning parameter) was specified using a theoretically derived plug-in value rather than a value selected through cross-validation. The plug-in penalty choice proposed by Belloni et al. (2012) is designed to provide theoretical performance guarantees for the Lasso and post-Lasso. This choice is constructed to provide sufficient control over overfitting, thereby reducing the need for cross-validation and additional sample splitting for tuning-parameter selection (Chernozhukov et al., 2024). 8

To examine the performance of the four approaches under different model-specification conditions, we considered four scenarios (Scenarios 1–4) representing different combinations of correct and incorrect specification of the PS and outcome models. We define model specification by whether the covariate sets initially included in the respective models contain the covariates needed for correct specification. 9 Because the Lasso-selected sets may differ from these initial sets, correct specification may not be explicitly defined based on the selected sets. In Scenario 1, both the PS and outcome models include the full covariate set S = {A, B} as their initial covariate sets and are therefore correctly specified. In Scenario 2, the PS model is correctly specified by including 

S, whereas the outcome model is misspecified by including only B, that is, omitting A.Scenario 3 represents the reverse case, with the PS model misspecified by including only A

and the outcome model correctly specified by including S. In Scenario 4, both models are misspecified, with the PS model including only A and the outcome model including only B.  

> 8Comparable theoretically derived plug-in choices for tuning parameters have not yet been established for other ML methods (Chernozhukov et al., 2024).
> 9Initial covariate sets are typically chosen based on subject-matter knowledge of the underlying DGP.

COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 24 Note that we intentionally consider these somewhat artificial splits of the initial covariate sets, which may not reflect how researchers would specify the models in practice. The primary purpose of this study is to demonstrate the advantages of using the union set relative to the other approaches across the four model specification scenarios. Thus, a systematic comparison across these scenarios requires holding other simulation conditions constant, including the decay rate governing the approximate sparsity assumption. Alternatively, both the PS and outcome models could begin with the same initial covariate set in every scenario, with the Lasso subsequently selecting different subsets that yield the model specification conditions of interest. However, generating the four scenarios in this manner requires substantially different simulation conditions across scenarios, thereby making it more difficult to attribute differences in estimation performance specifically to the model specification conditions. In Scenario 1, under the first approach—conventional DR estimation without covariate selection—the conditions for the DR property are satisfied because both the PS and outcome models are correctly specified using S. Under the second approach—doubly robust double Lasso estimation—the PS and outcome Lasso models separately select covariates from the initial set S, retaining those with nonzero but shrunken coefficient estimates. Specifically, the PS Lasso model selects SPS ⊂ S, and the outcome Lasso model selects SY ⊂ S. Then, the DR property holds if the PS model is correctly specified using 

SPS along with the corresponding shrunken coefficient estimates, or the outcome model is correctly specified using SY along with the corresponding shrunken coefficient estimates. The third approach—doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation described in Box 1—uses the same model-specific Lasso selection procedure as the second approach, yielding 

SPS ⊂ S for the PS model and SY ⊂ S for the outcome model. However, rather than using the shrunken Lasso coefficient estimates for predicting PSs and outcomes, the PS and outcome models are re-estimated using conventional regression methods with their respective selected covariate sets to adjust the shrunken coefficient estimates. Thus, the COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 25 DR property holds if the PS model is correctly specified using SPS , or the outcome model is correctly specified using SY . The fourth approach—doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation with the union set described in Box 2—first performs the same separate covariate selection using the PS and outcome Lasso models. It then constructs a union set containing all covariates selected by either model, SPS ∪ SY . Both the PS and outcome models are subsequently re-estimated using conventional regression methods with this common union set. Thus, the conditions for the DR property are satisfied if either the PS model or the outcome model is correctly specified using the union set. Table 1 summarizes the model specification scenarios considered in the simulation (upper panel) and the conditions under which the DR property holds for each of the four approaches across these model specification scenarios (lower panel). Table 1 shows that in Scenario 4, none of the approaches except the fourth approach can satisfy the conditions required for the DR property to hold. Without using the union set, the PS and outcome models may still jointly remove a substantial portion of the confounding bias induced by A

and B, because each model may eliminate most of the confounding bias attributable to the confounder set it includes. However, because the two models adjust for different sets of confounders, the additional bias amplified by including B in the outcome model is not addressed by the PS model that includes only A. By contrast, the fourth approach uses the union of the selected covariates to specify both models, allowing each model to incorporate the covariates selected by the other and thereby address bias-inducing misspecification arising from differential covariate selection (Steiner & Lyu, 2024). For each simulation condition, we report the proportion of confounding bias remaining, calculated by dividing the bias of each estimator by the original confounding bias, to quantify the extent to which each method removes confounding bias. The simulation results for Scenario 3 in Table 1 are reported in the Appendix because Scenarios 2 and 3 can be considered similar with respect to the DR property: in both scenarios, one of the PS or outcome models is correctly specified by its initial covariate set. COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 26 

Table 1 

Model specification scenarios and conditions for the double robustness property to hold 

Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 Scenario 4 

Model Specification 

Propensity score model 

Initial set S S A A

Specification Correct Correct Incorrect Incorrect 

Outcome model 

Initial set S B S B

Specification Correct Incorrect Correct Incorrect 

Conditions for Double Robustness Property to Hold 

DR CPS (S) or CPS (S) CY (S) —

CY (S)

DR-DL CPS (SPS )∗ or CPS (SPS )∗ CY (SY )∗ —

CY (SY )∗

DR-DPL CPS (SPS ) or CPS (SPS ) CY (SY ) —

CY (SY )

DR-DPL(U) CPS (SPS ∪ SY ) or CPS (SPS ∪ BY ) or CPS (APS ∪ SY ) or CPS (APS ∪ BY ) or 

CY (SPS ∪ SY ) CY (SPS ∪ BY ) CY (APS ∪ SY ) CY (APS ∪ BY )

Note. S = {A, B} denotes the full covariate set. SPS and SY denote the covariate sets selected from S by the propensity score and outcome Lasso models, respectively. APS denotes the subset selected from A by the propensity score Lasso model, and BY denotes the subset selected from 

B by the outcome Lasso model. DR refers to the conventional doubly robust estimation without covariate selection. DR-DL refers to doubly robust double Lasso estimation. DR-DPL refers to doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation. DR-DPL(U) refers to doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation with the union set. CPS (X ) and CY (X ) indicate that the propensity score and outcome models, respectively, are correctly specified using covariate set X . An asterisk ( ∗) denotes correct specification based on both the selected covariates and the corresponding shrunken coefficient estimates. A dash indicates that neither model can be correctly specified using its initial covariate set and, therefore, that the double robustness property does not hold. 

Results 

Scenario 1: Initial Sets Correctly Specify Both PS and Outcome Models 

Figure 2 presents the proportion of confounding bias remaining under Scenario 1, in which the initial covariate sets correctly specify both the PS and outcome models. Overall, conventional DR estimation produces nearly unbiased estimates across most simulation conditions. An exception occurs when the sample size is small relative to the number of COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 27 

Figure 2 

Proportion of confounding bias remaining in average treatment effect estimates for Scenario 1: When initial sets correctly specify both PS and outcome models 

Decay n = 500 n = 2000 n = 10000 

rate 

0.51 0 0.4  0.8 Remaining Bias (Prop.) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 

10 0.4  0.8 Remaining Bias (Prop.) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 2p = 300 2p = 100 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 2p = 300 2p = 100 

Note. n denotes the sample size, and 2p denotes the total number of covariates. DR refers to conventional doubly robust estimation without covariate selection. DR-DL refers to doubly robust double Lasso estimation. DR-DPL refers to doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation. DR-DPL(U) refers to doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation using the union set. The horizontal dotted line represents zero remaining bias. Bias with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals including zero is shown in gray. 

covariates. In particular, when n = 500 and 2p = 300 , conventional DR estimation yields unstable ATE estimates. Under this condition, the proportion of confounding bias remaining exhibits substantial variability when the decay rate is 0.51 and becomes markedly larger when the decay rate is 1, with the value falling outside the range displayed in the figure. The performance of the Lasso-based approaches is also less favorable when the sample size is small and the coefficient decay rate is slow. Under these conditions, the Lasso-based estimators generally do not attain the performance of conventional DR estimation and leave a larger proportion of confounding bias remaining. A smaller sample size provides less information for identifying covariates that are important for the PS and outcome models, increasing the likelihood that relevant covariates are omitted during the COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 28 Lasso selection procedure. This difficulty is further exacerbated under slower coefficient decay, where the predictive signal is distributed across a larger number of covariates rather than concentrated among a relatively small number of strongly predictive covariates. As both the sample size and coefficient decay rate increase, covariate selection becomes more reliable and the relevant predictors become easier to identify, resulting in a smaller proportion of confounding bias remaining and ATE estimates that are increasingly comparable to those obtained from conventional DR estimation. Among the Lasso-based approaches, the clearest advantage is observed for DR-DPL(U), which consistently exhibits the smallest proportion of confounding bias remaining across simulation conditions. Using the union of the covariate sets selected by the PS and outcome models substantially reduces the remaining bias relative to using separate selected covariate sets, with DR-DPL(U) approaching the performance of conventional DR estimation under many conditions. Even when both models are expected to be approximately correctly specified using their respective selected covariate sets, the union further improves ATE estimation beyond relying on model-specific covariate selection alone. The advantage of using the union is generally more pronounced under conditions with slower coefficient decay, where covariate selection is more challenging. The results also demonstrate the advantage of post-Lasso estimation over standard Lasso. Among the approaches that do not use the union, DR-DPL generally exhibits less remaining confounding bias than DR-DL, indicating that re-estimating the selected models without penalization improves ATE estimation by removing the coefficient shrinkage induced by the Lasso. Accordingly, the overall pattern among the Lasso-based approaches is that DR-DL retains the greatest proportion of confounding bias, DR-DPL reduces this bias through post-Lasso re-estimation, and DR-DPL(U) achieves the greatest reduction by additionally re-estimating both models using the union set. COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 29 

Figure 3 

Proportion of confounding bias remaining in average treatment effect estimates for Scenario 2: When initial sets correctly specify the PS Model but misspecify the outcome Model 

Decay n = 500 n = 2000 n = 10000 

rate 

0.51 0 0.4  0.8 Remaining Bias (Prop.) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 

10 0.4  0.8 Remaining Bias (Prop.) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 2p = 300 2p = 100 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 2p = 300 2p = 100 

Note. n denotes the sample size, and 2p denotes the total number of covariates. DR refers to conventional doubly robust estimation without covariate selection. DR-DL refers to doubly robust double Lasso estimation. DR-DPL refers to doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation. DR-DPL(U) refers to doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation using the union set. The horizontal dotted line represents zero remaining bias. Bias with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals including zero is shown in gray. 

Scenario 2: Initial Sets Correctly Specify the PS Model but Misspecify the Outcome Model 

Figure 3 presents the proportion of confounding bias remaining under Scenario 2, in which the PS model is correctly specified by the initial covariate set but the outcome model is misspecified. Overall, the patterns observed under Scenario 1 also emerge under Scenario 2, although the proportion of confounding bias remaining is generally larger. Unlike Scenario 1, in which the DR property can be satisfied through correct specification of either the PS model or the outcome model, the DR property under Scenario 2 depends solely on correct specification of the PS model because the outcome model is misspecified. COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 30 

Figure 4 

Proportion of confounding bias remaining in average treatment effect estimates for Scenario 4: When initial sets misspecify both PS and outcome models 

Decay n = 500 n = 2000 n = 10000 

rate 

0.51 0 0.4  0.8 Remaining Bias (Prop.) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 

10 0.4  0.8 Remaining Bias (Prop.) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 0 0.4  0.8 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 2p = 300 2p = 100 DR DR−DL DR−DPL DR−DPL(U) 2p = 300 2p = 100 

Note. n denotes the sample size, and 2p denotes the total number of covariates. DR refers to conventional doubly robust estimation without covariate selection. DR-DL refers to doubly robust double Lasso estimation. DR-DPL refers to doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation. DR-DPL(U) refers to doubly robust double post-Lasso estimation using the union set. The horizontal dotted line represents zero remaining bias. Bias with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals including zero is shown in gray. 

Scenario 4: Initial Sets Misspecify Both PS and Outcome Models 

Figure 4 presents the proportion of confounding bias remaining under Scenario 4, in which both the PS and outcome models are misspecified by their respective initial covariate sets. In contrast to the preceding scenarios, all approaches that do not use the union retain non-negligible confounding bias because neither model addresses the bias-inducing misspecification arising from covariates included only in the other model. By contrast, DR-DPL(U) uses the union of the selected covariates to specify both models, allowing each model to incorporate covariates selected by the other and thereby address bias-inducing misspecification arising from differential covariate selection (Steiner & Lyu, 2024). Accordingly, DR-DPL(U) consistently exhibits substantially less remaining bias than the other approaches, with its advantage becoming more pronounced as the sample size COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 31 increases. Under some conditions, DR-DPL(U) approaches or slightly outperforms conventional DR estimation. 

Discussion Summary 

High-dimensional data create substantial challenges for causal effect estimation because researchers must identify an appropriate set of covariates from a potentially large number of candidates while also specifying the functional relationships among treatment, outcome, and covariates. ML methods offer useful tools for addressing these challenges by automating covariate selection and flexibly estimating functional forms. DML further facilitates the use of ML for causal inference by mitigating regularization and overfitting bias and thereby permitting √n-consistent estimation under appropriate conditions. However, much of the DML literature has emphasized this convergence-rate property arising from Neyman orthogonality, whereas the implications of covariate selection for the DR property possessed by some DML estimators have received comparatively less attention. The present study focused on covariate selection as a central component of correct model specification in DR-DML estimation. In particular, we considered two problems that may limit the practical utility of the DR property: differential covariate selection and misspecification of both the PS and outcome models. These problems may be especially relevant in high-dimensional settings because ML methods applied separately to the two models are unlikely to select identical sets of covariates, even when both models begin with the same initial set. Moreover, the selected set for either model may omit covariates necessary for correct model specification. Thus, the use of ML for automated covariate selection does not by itself ensure that the conditions required for the DR property will hold. Our primary contribution is to address these two problems arising from incorrect COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 32 covariate selection by re-estimating both the PS and outcome models using the union of the covariates selected by the two ML models. Moving beyond the limited use of the union in previous studies, we explicitly distinguish the respective roles of DR-DML estimation and the union of selected covariates and combine them to address these two problems. This use of the union is motivated directly by the conditions required for the DR property to hold. re-estimating both models using the same union set eliminates differential covariate selection at the final model-specification stage. At the same time, because the union retains covariates selected as important by either model, it increases the opportunity for at least one nuisance model to include the covariates necessary for correct specification. Thus, rather than simply transferring the conventional use of the union to a different DGP, our approach isolates its distinct role in constructing covariate sets and leverages that role to strengthen the practical utility of the DR property in DR-DML estimation. The simulation results provide support for our proposed use of the union. Among the Lasso-based approaches, DR-DPL(U) consistently exhibited the smallest proportion of confounding bias remaining. Its advantage was evident even when both the PS and outcome models were approximately correctly specified using their separately selected covariate sets, a setting in which the DR property would already be expected to hold. The benefit of using the union became more pronounced when both models were misspecified by their respective initial covariate sets. Under this condition, approaches using separate selected sets retained non-negligible confounding bias, whereas DR-DPL(U) substantially reduced the remaining bias and, under some conditions, approached or slightly outperformed conventional DR estimation. By using the union, each model incorporates the covariates selected by the other, thereby directly addressing bias-inducing misspecification arising from covariates included only in the other model. The union therefore provides protection not only against differential covariate selection but also against the possibility that neither model is correctly specified by its own selected set. Beyond this primary contribution, the simulation provides several additional COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 33 insights into the use of ML for causal inference. First, the results clarify when ML-based covariate selection may and may not be advantageous relative to conventional DR estimation. When an appropriate set of covariates was already available and could be estimated reliably using conventional methods, conventional DR estimation generally performed well. However, conventional DR estimation became unstable when the number of covariates was large relative to the sample size, illustrating the motivation for dimension reduction through ML. At the same time, the Lasso-based procedures could retain substantial confounding bias when the sample size was small relative to the number of candidate covariates. Importantly, these results were obtained under simulation conditions that were relatively favorable to Lasso-based approaches and may be stronger than those typically encountered in practice. In particular, we considered settings in which the approximate sparsity assumption was satisfied and constructed the DGP so that the conditions for the DR property were likely to hold, except in Scenario 4, where both models were misspecified. We also designed the DGP so that the union of the selected covariate sets was likely to retain the covariates needed to satisfy unconfoundedness. Thus, even under conditions favorable to Lasso-based covariate selection, Lasso-based approaches did not uniformly outperform conventional estimation. These findings therefore do not support the automatic use of ML whenever high-dimensional covariates are available. Rather, the value of ML-based estimation depends on the dimensionality of the problem, the available sample size, and the reliability with which the ML procedure can identify the covariates needed for correct specification of the PS and outcome models. Second, the simulation results highlight the distinction between standard Lasso and post-Lasso estimation. DR-DPL generally retained less confounding bias than DR-DL, indicating that directly using the shrunken coefficients produced by the Lasso can adversely affect causal effect estimation even when Lasso provides useful covariate selection. The improved performance of DR-DPL relative to DR-DL demonstrates the advantage of retaining the covariate-selection function of the Lasso while removing its COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 34 coefficient shrinkage when estimating causal effects. In this respect, Lasso and post-Lasso should not be treated interchangeably when they are used for causal effect estimation; the distinction between covariate selection and subsequent estimation of the PS and outcome models has meaningful consequences for remaining confounding bias. Third, the simulation results illustrate the importance of the assumptions underlying the ML procedure itself. For the Lasso, effective covariate selection depends on approximate sparsity. We explicitly varied the coefficient decay rate to represent conditions that marginally and more strongly satisfied approximate sparsity. Lasso-based approaches generally performed less favorably under slower coefficient decay because predictive information was distributed across a larger number of covariates, making it more difficult for the Lasso to retain all covariates needed for correct model specification. As coefficient decay became faster and sample size increased, covariate selection became more reliable and the Lasso-based estimators increasingly approached conventional DR estimation. These findings emphasize that the performance of ML-based causal estimators depends not merely on the choice to use ML, but also on whether the assumptions and structural conditions that make a particular ML procedure effective are sufficiently plausible for the data at hand. Finally, although our primary focus was the reduction of confounding bias in finite samples, the proposed union strategy is compatible with the √n-consistency that motivates DML estimation. The DR-DML estimator remains based on the same Neyman-orthogonal score; the proposed approach changes how the covariate sets used to estimate the nuisance functions are constructed rather than replacing the underlying causal effect estimator. Thus, re-estimating the PS and outcome models using the union set does not sacrifice the asymptotic motivation for DML while providing an opportunity to improve the removal of confounding bias in finite samples. COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 35 

Limitations 

Several limitations should be considered when interpreting these findings. First, although our simulation extends beyond the DGPs and corresponding DML estimators commonly examined in the DML literature by allowing for heterogeneous rather than constant treatment effects, the DGP itself remains deliberately simple and stylized. In particular, we specified relatively simple functional forms for the PS and outcome models, generated the two sets of confounders independently, and used controlled divisions of the available covariates across simulation scenarios to represent different forms of model specification. These choices were intentional because our primary purpose was to demonstrate the distinct advantages of using the union set and to isolate the consequences of covariate selection from other complexities of the DGP. Nevertheless, such settings do not fully reflect the complexity of real-world high-dimensional data, which may involve violations of unconfoundedness and approximate sparsity, nonlinear relationships and complex dependence structures among covariates. Future research should therefore evaluate the proposed approach under more realistic and complex DGPs, particularly settings in which both covariate selection and estimation of the functional forms of the PS and outcome models are challenging. For example, when the true DGP involves interactions among confounders or higher-order polynomial effects, greater attention must be given to how predictors are initially constructed, because the candidate predictor set may need to include nonlinear transformations and interaction terms derived from the original covariates. Unless such relevant terms are explicitly included among the candidate predictors, Lasso-based selection may fail to adequately approximate the underlying PS or outcome regression function. Future studies should therefore consider richer predictor representations or ML methods that can more flexibly capture complex functional relationships. Second, the present study considers only the Lasso as the ML method. The Lasso provides an important starting point because of its foundational role in the development of COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 36 high-dimensional causal inference and because its explicit covariate-selection mechanism makes it possible to clearly distinguish the effects of covariate selection, coefficient shrinkage, and the union set. Nevertheless, the generality of the proposed strategy should be investigated using a broader range of ML methods. In particular, future work could consider tree-based ensemble methods such as random forests and boosting, which can implicitly select or prioritize predictors through their fitting procedures. Extending the proposed approach to such methods will require defining how information about selected or important predictors is combined across the PS and outcome models. It will also be important to examine the learner-specific conditions that play a role analogous to approximate sparsity for the Lasso and to determine how violations of those conditions affect both covariate selection and the performance of the resulting DR-DML estimator. The current results already demonstrate that the effectiveness of Lasso-based procedures depends materially on the degree of approximate sparsity, suggesting that the benefits of the union should be evaluated jointly with the assumptions underlying the ML method used to construct it. Taken together, the findings suggest that covariate selection should be treated as an integral component of DR-DML estimation rather than as an independent preprocessing step conducted separately for the PS and outcome models. The union set provides a simple way to integrate the information learned by the two models, address differential covariate selection, and increase the opportunity for the DR property to hold when model-specific selected sets are insufficient. More broadly, our findings emphasize that the advantages of ML for causal inference depend not only on the predictive performance of the learning algorithm, but also on the assumptions underlying the ML procedure and on how the information learned from the data is incorporated into the causal estimator. COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 37 References Bang, H., & Robins, J. M. (2005). Doubly robust estimation in missing data and causal inference models. Biometrics , 61 (4), 962–973. Belloni, A., Chen, D., Chernozhukov, V., & Hansen, C. (2012). Sparse models and methods for optimal instruments with an application to eminent domain. 

Econometrica , 80 (6), 2369–2429. Belloni, A., & Chernozhukov, V. (2013). Least squares after model selection in high-dimensional sparse models. Bernoulli , 19 (2), 521–547. Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V., & Hansen, C. (2011). Inference for high-dimensional sparse econometric models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1201.0220 .Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V., & Hansen, C. (2014). Inference on treatment effects after selection among high-dimensional controls. Review of Economic Studies , 81 (2), 608–650. Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D., Demirer, M., Duflo, E., Hansen, C., Newey, W., & Robins, J. (2018). Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural parameters. The Econometrics Journal , 21 (1), C1-C68. Chernozhukov, V., Hansen, C., Kallus, N., Spindler, M., & Syrgkanis, V. (2024). Applied causal inference powered by ML and AI . arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02467. Cho, E., & Yang, S. (2024). Variable selection for doubly robust causal inference. Statistics and Its Interface , 18 (1), 93. De Luna, X., Waernbaum, I., & Richardson, T. S. (2011). Covariate selection for the nonparametric estimation of an average treatment effect. Biometrika , 98 (4), 861–875. Glynn, A. N., & Quinn, K. M. (2010). An introduction to the augmented inverse propensity weighted estimator. Political Analysis , 18 (1), 36–56. Hünermund, P., Louw, B., & Caspi, I. (2023). Double machine learning and automated confounder selection: A cautionary tale. Journal of Causal Inference , 11 (1). COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 38 Imbens, G. W., & Wooldridge, J. M. (2009). Recent developments in the econometrics of program evaluation. Journal of Economic Literature , 47 (1), 5–86. Koch, B., Vock, D. M., & Wolfson, J. (2018). Covariate selection with group lasso and doubly robust estimation of causal effects. Biometrics , 74 (1), 8–17. Lunceford, J. K., & Davidian, M. (2004). Stratification and weighting via the propensity score in estimation of causal treatment effects: a comparative study. Statistics in Medicine , 23 (19), 2937–2960. Neyman, J. (1959). Optimal asymptotic tests of composite statistical hypotheses. In U. Grenander (Ed.), Probability and Statistics: The Harald Cramér Volume (pp. 213–234). Almqvist & Wiksell. Robins, J. M., & Rotnitzky, A. (1995). Semiparametric efficiency in multivariate regression models with missing data. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 90 (429), 122–129. Robins, J. M., & Rotnitzky, A. (2001). Comment on “Inference for semiparametric models: Some questions and an answer,” by PJ Bickel and J. Kwon. Statistica Sinica , 11 ,920–936. Robins, J. M., Rotnitzky, A., & Zhao, L. P. (1994). Estimation of regression coefficients when some regressors are not always observed. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 89 (427), 846–866. Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. B. (1983). The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika , 70 (1), 41–55. Schafer, J. L., & Kang, J. (2008). Average causal effects from nonrandomized studies: a practical guide and simulated example. Psychological Methods , 13 (4), 279. Scharfstein, D. O., Rotnitzky, A., & Robins, J. M. (1999). Adjusting for nonignorable drop-out using semiparametric nonresponse models. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 94 (448), 1096–1120. Steiner, P. M., & Kim, Y. (2016). The mechanics of omitted variable bias: Bias COVARIATE SELECTION FOR DR-DML 39 amplification and cancellation of offsetting biases. Journal of Causal Inference , 4 (2). Steiner, P. M., & Lyu, W. (2024). Robust covariate selection for doubly robust estimators in causal inference. OSF .Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 58 (1), 267–288. Tsiatis, A. A. (2006). Semiparametric Theory and Missing Data (Vol. 4). Springer. Valentin, S., Detommaso, G., Li, Y., Opper, M., & Brückner, M. (2025). On double robustness in double machine learning. In Neurips 2025 workshop on causcien: Uncovering causality in science. 

Vansteelandt, S., Bekaert, M., & Claeskens, G. (2012). On model selection and model misspecification in causal inference. Statistical Methods in Medical Research , 21 (1), 7–30. Witte, J., & Didelez, V. (2019). Covariate selection strategies for causal inference: Classification and comparison. Biometrical Journal , 61 (5), 1270–1289.