Title: Difference-in-Differences Models in the Presence of Time-Varying Mediators

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.18375v1

Published Time: Thu, 20 Aug 2026 00:15:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

KYUNGHOON BAN, ZHENGRUN CHEN, AND D ´ESIR ´E K ´EDAGNI 

Rochester Institute of Technology and UNC-Chapel Hill 

Abstract. We study difference-in-differences (DiD) designs in which a binary treatment changes an endogenous time-varying (continuous, discrete, or mixed) me-diator that in turn affects an outcome. Under our model assumptions, we show that the usual DiD estimand mixes the average direct effect on the treated, the average indirect effect, and a trend bias term. A two-way fixed effects (TWFE) regression that controls for the mediator does not recover the average direct treatment effect on the treated. We show that a DiD estimand conditional on the observed mediator path identifies the conditional average direct effect for treated units at that path, and that averaging over the treated path distribution identifies the average direct effect even when unconditional parallel trends fails. A stable average mediator effect assumption helps recover the average mediator and indirect effects. The framework extends to multivariate mediators, nonlinear DiD, and multiple treatment periods settings. Existing doubly robust estimators can be used to conduct inference. Re-visiting the effects of railroad access on agricultural land values, the specification yields a positive direct component not mediated by measured market access, while the corresponding indirect component is small and imprecise. A TWFE benchmark with the same sample and baseline geographic covariates gives a small, imprecise direct coefficient, whereas the original-control TWFE coefficient reverses sign. 

Keywords : Difference-in-differences, endogenous time-varying covariates, causal mediation. 

JEL subject classification : C14, C31, C35, C36. 

Date : The present version is as of August 20, 2026. We thank Bocar Ba, Jane Fruehwirth, Martin Huber, Valentin Verdier, and participants at the UNC econometrics workshop, the 2025 SEA Meeting, the 2026 AfES conference, seminar participants at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute for helpful comments. All errors are ours. Kyunghoon Ban (kban@saunders.rit.edu); Zhengrun Chen (zhengrun@unc.edu); D´ esir´ e K´ edagni (dkedagni@unc.edu). 0arXiv:2608.18375v1 [econ.EM] 18 Aug 2026 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 1

1. Introduction 

The use of difference-in-differences (DiD) models in economics and social sciences has increased rapidly in recent years. The method relies on a key assumption called parallel trends. The presence of mediators could compromise the validity of this assumption. In this paper, we study identification in DiD models when mediators are present. We study this problem for a binary treatment and a mediator that may be continuous, discrete, or mixed, may vary over time, and may be related to unobserved determinants of the outcome. More specifically, to provide some intuition behind our main research question of interest, consider the following model 

$’’&’’%

Yit “ θit Dit ` βit Mit ` λi ` ηt ` Uit ,Mit “ ψtpDit , γ i, ˜Vit q,Dit “ htpλi, γ i, ε it q,

where the vector pt Yit , D it , M it uiPN ,t PT q is observed, while everything else is unob-served/unknown. In the specification above, Yit is the outcome, Mit is the mediator, and Dit is the treatment. 1 The outcome equation contains a random direct effect of treatment θit , a random effect of the mediator on the outcome βit , individual fixed effects λi, time effects ηt, and idiosyncratic shocks Uit . The mediator, which can be continuous, discrete or mixed, is specified as an unknown function ψt of a vector of unobservables ˜Vit , its own individual fixed effect γi, where the function ψt can change arbitrarily over time. Treatment selection is allowed to depend on the fixed effects in both the outcome and mediator equations and on an additional unobserv-able random shock εit , through an unknown function ht. The outcome and mediator fixed effects may be arbitrarily dependent (e.g., a special case is common fixed effects, 

λi “ γi). The direct effect is heterogeneous and may depend on the mediator path. The mediator effect on the outcome may also vary across individuals and over time. In this paper, we are interested in measuring the direct effect of treatment Dit on the outcome Yit , that is, we want to learn about some features of θit .       

> 1Throughout the paper, we assume that no individual receives the treatment in the baseline period, i.e., Di0“0 a.s. So, in the canonical DiD setting, our focus is on the treatment Di1“Di.2DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS

There are many empirical examples where there is a mediator between the treat-ment and the outcome of interest. For example, an expansion of health insurance (Medicare or Medicaid) can affect health conditions both directly and indirectly through preventive care. Also, a school reform such as an introduction of a new curriculum can affect wages directly and indirectly through educational attainment, or a local regulation may affect productivity directly and indirectly through asset values, input prices, or labor-market conditions. In these examples, the mediator is not an ordinary pre-treatment covariate but a post-treatment object whose distribu-tion may be changed by the policy and affected by unobserved determinants of the outcome of interest. Consequently, simply controlling for it in a two-way fixed effects regression will generally induce some bias in the attempt to isolate the direct effect. To illustrate the main idea behind our identification approach, we start from the canonical two-period, two-group DiD design. We first highlight the fact that the standard parallel trends assumption for the untreated outcome may not hold under our proposed framework and the set of assumptions we consider. Even when the idiosyncratic shocks satisfy independence restrictions, treated and untreated units can have different untreated outcome trends because they have different mediator fixed effects and because the average return to the mediator may change over time. Second, we emphasize that a TWFE regression controlling for the mediator generally fails to recover the average direct treatment effect on the treated because residualizing the treatment with respect to the mediator mechanically changes the estimand. Hence, the resulting coefficient generally mixes the direct effect with terms that depend on mediator effect heterogeneity and treatment-induced mediator changes. Afterwards, we carefully propose a different route. We consider the difference between outcome changes for treated and untreated units, conditional on the full observed mediator path pMi0, M i1q. Then, we show that, under a DiD analogue of the sequential ignorability assumption considered in Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto (2010), this path-conditional DiD estimand identifies the conditional average direct treatment effect on the treated, denoted CADT T . Averaging this conditional estimand over the mediator path distribution of treated units identifies the average direct treatment effect on the treated, ADT T . Importantly, this result does not require the standard DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 3

unconditional parallel trends assumption and is not a standard conditional parallel trends argument with a post-treatment covariate. Furthermore, we clarify that the standard DiD estimand can be decomposed into average direct and indirect effects plus a bias term that vanishes when the standard parallel trends assumption holds, which can be implied when the average effect of the mediator on the outcome is stable across periods under our framework. Since the direct effect is identified by the path-conditional DiD approach, the average indirect effect can consequently be identified. Accordingly, the average mediator effect on the outcome of interest can be identified as well when the treatment effect on the mediator is identified from a DiD estimand for the mediator. The mediator path argument also extends to multiple treatment periods (Callaway and Sant’Anna, 2021; de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille, 2020), staggered adoption as well as nonstaggered adoption. For estimation, the identified ADT T can be written as the integral of a conditional DiD estimand, where the conditioning variables are the pre- and post-treatment mediator values, with respect to the observed mediator path distribution for the treated group. We therefore use the doubly robust (DR) DiD estimator of Sant’Anna and Zhao (2020), applied with the mediator path as the conditioning vector. This paper is related to several branches of the literature. First, it contributes to the causal mediation analysis. Classical mediation analysis studies decompositions of total effects into direct and indirect components and highlights that mediator endogeneity is a fundamental obstacle (Robins and Greenland, 1992; Pearl, 2001; Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto, 2010). Identification has been based on selection-on-observables assumptions, with the literature developing sensitivity analyses, nonpara-metric identification results, decompositions allowing interaction between treatment and the mediator, and machine-learning-based estimators (VanderWeele, 2014; Celli, 2022; Farbmacher et al., 2022). In contrast, we allow selection into treatment through unobserved fixed effects and exploit within-unit changes through the DiD structure, while explicitly allowing the mediator to be time-varying, endogenous, and affected by the treatment. 4 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

Second, our paper is more closely related to recent work on mediation in DiD designs. Deuchert, Huber, and Schelker (2019) propose a DiD approach for direct and indirect effects with a binary mediator in principal strata. Hsia et al. (2025) develop mediation analysis for DiD and panel data under common-trend-type assumptions and linear/additive specifications. More relatedly, Schenk (2024) studies direct and indirect effects in DiD designs in the presence of a binary time-varying mediator. His identification approach relies on a set of parallel trends assumptions for the outcome and mediator, and mean independence of the treatment with respect to the untreated mediator. Our framework, on the other hand, allows for continuous, discrete, or mixed mediators. We also allow for dependence between the potential mediators and the treatment. Furthermore, Huber and Oberh¨ ansli (2026) propose a DiD mediation framework for multivalued discrete or continuous treatments and mediators using conditional parallel trends and double/debiased machine learning. In their setting, the mediator is time-invariant, while it is time-varying in our framework. Third, our analysis contributes to work on treatment-affected covariates in panel treatment effect models. Exogenous time-varying covariates can make parallel trends more plausible, but including endogenous time-varying covariates as controls in a TWFE regression can alter the TWFE estimand and introduce some bias when the treatment changes those covariates. Notably, Caetano and Callaway (2024) formalizes several problems with TWFE regressions under conditional parallel trends, including a hidden linearity bias. Brown, Butts, and Westerlund (2026) develop a panel ap-proach with interactive fixed effects that permits treatment-affected covariates and separates the part of the estimated treatment effect due to the covariates from the part that is not. Our approach shares the view that treatment-affected variables should not be handled as ordinary controls. The difference is that we explicitly inter-pret such a variable as a mediator and identify direct and indirect effects for treated units. Finally, our paper connects to extensions of DiD beyond the mean and linear mod-els. Our nonlinear extension is in the spirit of changes-in-changes and nonlinear DiD approaches that identify counterfactual outcome distributions under restrictions on latent shocks rather than mean parallel trends (Athey and Imbens, 2006; Wooldridge, 2023; Kim and Wooldridge, 2025). In our setting, the nonlinear argument is applied DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 5

conditionally on the mediator path, which identifies distributional and quantile ver-sions of direct effects. We also extend the baseline framework to multivariate media-tors. The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 sets out the baseline model and causal parameters. Section 3 derives the conventional estimand diagnostics and the mediator-path identification result, and Section 4 restates that result in potential outcome notation. Section 5 treats multivariate mediators, nonlinear outcomes, and multiple treatment periods. Section 6 reports the railroad application, followed by the a summary and discussion in Section 7. 2. Baseline structural framework 

We first consider a canonical two-group, two-period DiD design. Individuals i are observed in a baseline period t “ 0 and a post-treatment period t “ 1. Let Di P t 0, 1u

denote treatment-group status, Mit a continuous mediator, and Yit the outcome. The model is specified as follows: 

$’&’%

Yit “ θitD i ` βit Mit ` λi ` ηt ` Uit ,Mit “ αitD i ` γi ` δt ` Vit ,Di “ hpλi, γ i, ε iq,

(2.1) where t P t 0, 1u, the vector pYi0, Y i1, M i0, M i1, D iq represents the observed data for each individual i, while the vector pθi, α i, λ i, γ i, ε i, tβit , U it , V it ut“0,1q is latent. ηt and 

δt are nonrandom time effects, λi and γi are time-invariant individual heterogeneity in the outcome and mediator equations, and Uit and Vit are time-varying shocks. θi

is the direct effect of the treatment on the outcome Yi1 in period 1, αi is the effect of the treatment on the mediator Mi1, and βit is the effect of Mit on the outcome Yit .Treatment status is determined by the selection equation Di “ hpλi, γ i, ε iq, where 

h is an unknown function and εi is an additional latent unobservable. Selection into treatment therefore depends on both λi and γi, allowing individuals to sort into treatment on unobserved determinants of both the outcome and the mediator. In this model, we allow the direct treatment effect to depend flexibly on the medi-ator path, i.e., θi ” ˜θipMi0, M i1q. The dependence between the fixed effects λi and γi6 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

is left unrestricted (e.g., λi “ γi is permitted). Moreover, the model allows the effect of the mediator on the outcome (i.e., βit ) to vary across individuals and over time. In the potential outcomes framework, let Mit pdq denote the potential mediator under treatment d, and let Yit pd, m q be the potential outcome under treatment d and mediator m. We write Yit pdq ” Yit pd, M it pdqq and define Yit pd, M it pd1qq as the cross-world potential outcome, where the treatment is set to d and the mediator is held at its value under treatment d1. Model (2.1) then yields 

Yit pdq ” Yit pd, M it pdqq “ θitd ` βit Mit pdq ` λi ` ηt ` Uit ,Yit pd, M it pd1qq ” θitd ` βit Mit pd1q ` λi ` ηt ` Uit ,Mit pdq ” αitd ` γi ` δt ` Vit .

Note that the above model implies that there are no anticipatory effects of the treat-ment in the baseline period 0, i.e., Yi0p0q “ Yi0p1q and Mi0p0q “ Mi0p1q. This no-anticipation restriction is standard in DiD models. Using this potential outcome notation, we define the causal parameters of interest. 

Definition 1. The average total, direct, and indirect treatment effects on the treated in period 1 are defined as 

AT T ” ErYi1p1, M i1p1qq ´ Yi1p0, M i1p0qq | Di “ 1s,ADT T pdq ” ErYi1p1, M i1pdqq ´ Yi1p0, M i1pdqq | Di “ 1s,AIT T pdq ” ErYi1pd, M i1p1qq ´ Yi1pd, M i1p0qq | Di “ 1s,

for d P t 0, 1u.

These correspond to the natural direct and indirect treatment effects studied in the causal mediation literature (Pearl, 2001; Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto, 2010), restricted to the treated subpopulation. ADT T pdq captures the effect of changing treatment status while holding the mediator at its potential value Mi1pdq, and AIT T pdq is the effect of the treatment-induced change in the mediator while holding treatment fixed at d. By construction, 

AT T “ ADT T pdq ` AIT T p1 ´ dq.DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 7

Model (2.1) is additively separable in the direct and indirect channels: for each d,

Yi1p1, M i1pdqq ´ Yi1p0, M i1pdqq “ θi, and Yi1pd, M i1p1qq ´ Yi1pd, M i1p0qq “ βi1αi. Thus, the direct effect is invariant to the mediator value at which it is evaluated, while the indirect effect is invariant to the treatment level. Consequently, 

ADT T p1q “ ADT T p0q “ Erθi | Di “ 1s,AIT T p1q “ AIT T p0q “ Erβi1αi | Di “ 1s,

and 

AT T “ Erθi | Di “ 1s ` Erβi1αi | Di “ 1s.

We therefore suppress the argument d and write ADT T and AIT T throughout. This additive separability of the two channels plays an important role in identifying these effects. 3. Identification: conventional estimands and mediator path DiD 

In this section, we state the main identifying assumptions and then present the baseline identification results. All identification results hold conditional on exogenous time-invariant covariates vector Xi such that Xip0q “ Xip1q “ Xi.3.1. Identifying assumptions. Assumption 1 (Exogenous fixed effects) . pλi, γ i, ε iq|ù pt Vit , U it , β it ut“0,1, α iq

Assumption 2 (Conditional independence) . pt Vit ut“0,1, α iq|ù pt Uit , β it ut“0,1q|p λi, γ i, ε iq

Assumption 1 requires the unobservables driving selection into treatment, (λi, γ i, ε i), to be independent of all other unobservables in the model except the direct effect θi. By allowing θi to depend on selection unobservables, the model per-mits selection on the direct gain from treatment. Assumption 2 further requires that, conditional on the selection unobservables, the latent components in the mediator equation are independent of those in the outcome equation, again except for θi.Together, Assumptions 1 and 2 can be viewed as a DiD analogue of the sequential ignorability assumption in Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto (2010). They imply that, aside 8 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

from the direct effect θi, dependence between the mediator and the outcome arises only through the fixed effects λi and γi. In particular, they rule out time-varying unobservables that jointly affect the mediator and the outcome. These assumptions yield the implications stated in Lemma 1 below. 

Lemma 1. Assumptions 1 and 2 imply the following: 

pt Uit , β it ut“0,1q|ù pt Vit ut“0,1, α i, λ i, γ i, ε iq

Proof. See Appendix A.1. □

Lemma 1 is important for proving our main identification results. 3.2. Why conventional estimands fail. 

3.2.1. Standard DiD and the total effect. Let ∆ Yi “ Yi1 ´ Yi0 and ∆ Mi “ Mi1 ´ Mi0,and define the DiD estimand 

τ DiD ” Er∆Yi | Di “ 1s ´ Er∆Yi | Di “ 0s.

Under model (2.1) and Assumptions 1 and 2, we show that 

τ DiD “ Erθi | Di “ 1slooooooomooooooon 

> direct

` Erβi1s Erαislooooomooooon 

> indirect

` Erβi1 ´ βi0s`Erγi | Di “ 1s ´ Erγi | Di “ 0s˘loooooooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooooooon 

> parallel-trends bias

.

The last term is due to the violation of the parallel trends assumption, 

ErYi1p0q ´ Yi0p0q | Di “ 1s ´ ErYi1p0q ´ Yi0p0q | Di “ 0s“ Erβi1 ´ βi0s`Erγi | Di “ 1s ´ Erγi | Di “ 0s˘,

which is nonzero whenever the average mediator effect changes over time and γi is correlated with treatment status. Hence, τ DiD generally mixes the direct effect, the indirect effect, and a parallel-trends bias, and has no causal interpretation on its own. When the average mediator effect is stable ( Erβi1s “ Erβi0s) or there is no treatment selection on the mediator fixed effects ( Erγi|Dis “ Erγis), the standard parallel trends assumption holds, the bias vanishes, and the DiD estimand recovers the average total treatment effect on the treated, τ DiD “ AT T “ Erθi | Di “ 1s ` Erβi1s Erαis.DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 9

3.2.2. TWFE conditioning on Mit and the direct effect. A natural question to ask is: does a TWFE estimand that controls for Mit identify the direct treatment effect under our model? To address this, we consider the following TWFE regression with a scalar mediator Mit : for t P t 0, 1u,

Yit “ π1tD i ` π2Mit ` ϕi ` ζt ` ξit 

where ϕi is the individual fixed effect, ζt is the time fixed effect, π1 and π2 are constant coefficients. In practice, the coefficient π1 is often interpreted as an average direct treatment effect on the outcome. However, as shown below, it generally combines the true average direct effect with additional bias terms. To characterize the TWFE estimands, we introduce the following notation. For any random variables X and Y , let Π pY | Xq denote the linear projection of Y onto 

X, i.e., Π pY | Xq ” EpY q ` Cov pX,Y q 

> V ar pXq

rX ´ EpXqs . Define the residualized Di with respect to ∆ Mi as rDi ” Di ´ ΠpDi | ∆Miq and the residualized ∆ Mi with respect to 

Di as Ć∆Mi ” ∆Mi ´ Πp∆Mi | Diq. Then, the TWFE estimands are π1 “ Cov p rDi,∆Yiq  

> V ar prDiq

,and π2 “ Cov p Ć∆Mi,∆Yiq  

> V ar pĆ∆Miq

.2 The following claim shows that each of these estimands can be decomposed into three terms. 

Claim 1. Under model (2.1) , Assumptions 1 and 2, the estimands for π1 and π2 from the above TWFE regression can be decomposed as: 

π1 “ Epθi | Di “ 1q` Epβi1 ´ βi0q

˜

Cov pDi, γ iq

V ar p rDiq ´ EpαiqCov p∆Mi, M i0q

V ar p Ą∆M iq

¸

(A) 

` Epαiq

V ar p Ą∆M iq

`EpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiq ´ Cov p∆Mi, θ iDiq˘. (B) 

π2 “ Epβi1q

> 2

Throughout this subsection, assume the relevant second moments are finite and the population rank condition holds: 0 ă V ar pDiq ă 8 , 0 ă V ar p∆Miq ă 8 , V ar p rDiq ą 0, and V ar pĆ∆M iq ą 0. Equivalently, after partialling out the mediator change, the treatment regressor has nonzero residual variation, and after partialling out treatment status, the mediator change has nonzero residual variation. 10 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

` Epβi1 ´ βi0q

V ar p Ą∆M iq

”

Cov p∆Mi, M i0q ´ EpαiqCov pDi, γ iq

ı

(C) 

` 1

V ar p Ą∆M iq

”

Cov p∆Mi, θ iDiq ´ EpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiq

ı

. (D) Claim 1 shows that TWFE generally fails to identify the average direct treatment effect and the average mediator effects. Instead, the coefficients π1 and π2 combine the causal parameters of interest with several bias terms; see proof in Appendix A.2. For π1, it can be decomposed into the ADTT and two bias terms. The first bias term (A) is driven by differences in the average mediator effects on the outcome across periods. This difference would imply that the evolution of untreated potential outcome will depend on both the level of untreated mediator and its change over time: ∆Yip0q “ βi1∆Mip0q ` ˜βiMi0p0q ` η1 ´ η0 ` Ui1 ´ Ui0

where ˜βi “ βi1 ´ βi0. However, the TWFE specification implicitly imposes that the evolution depends only on the change in mediators. This feature is analogous to the “hidden linearity bias” 3 in Caetano and Callaway (2024). However, unlike their setting, our framework does not suffer from the “explicit linearity bias”, which arises when the conditional expectation of the change in untreated potential outcomes is nonlinear in the change in mediators over time. In our model, this relationship remains linear. In addition, relative to Caetano and Callaway (2024), our setting introduces an additional bias term (B) which is driven by the endogeneity of mediators. This bias appears when the average treatment effect on the mediator is nonzero and the direct treatment effects on the outcome, θi, is correlated with other unobserved heterogeneity in the model.   

> 3In Caetano and Callaway (2024), the “hidden linearity bias” arises from the fact that the evo-lution of untreated potential outcomes depends on time-invariant exogenous covariates, the level of time-varying exogenous covariates, and the change in these covariates, which TWFE regressions fail to capture. Instead, we focus on the endogenous time-varying covariates (mediators), but we can flexibly accommodate both time-invariant and time-varying exogenous covariates in our model. DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 11

For π2, it conflates mediator effects on the outcome from both periods, as captured by the term (C), and includes an additional bias term (D) driven by the dependence between direct treatment effects θi and other unobserved heterogeneity in the model. These bias terms disappear only under strong conditions. For example, suppose 

Epαiq ‰ 0, if the average mediator effect is time-invariant, i.e., Epβi1q “ Epβi0q, and the direct treatment effect on the outcome is independent of both the treatment ef-fect on the mediator and the shocks in the mediator equation, i.e., θi

> |ù

pαi, V i1, V i0q,which implies Cov p∆Mi, θ iDiq “ EpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiq, then the TWFE regression con-ditional on Mit identifies the average direct treatment effect on the treated Erθi | Di “

1s, as well as the average mediator effects in period 1, Epβi1q.Figure 1 provides a Monte Carlo illustration of these results; see the simulation design in Appendix B.1. Under this DGP, the true ATT and ADTT equal 2 and 1, respectively. Nevertheless, standard DiD and TWFE estimators produce biased estimates of these parameters, with the sign reversals. This motivates the mediator-path identification strategy discussed in Section 3.3. 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 −2 −1 0 1 2

> τ^DiD TWFE Density

(a) Total effect 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 

> π^1Density

(b) Direct effect 

Figure 1. Monte Carlo simulation of TWFE estimators 

Notes : The figure reports the Monte Carlo distribution of the TWFE estimates based on 1000 simulation replications. Panel (a) shows the distribution of the TWFE coefficient on tD i from a regression of Yit on tD i with unit and time fixed effects, corresponding to the total effect. Panel (b) shows the distribution of the TWFE coefficient on tD i from a regression of Yit on tD i and Mit 

with unit and time fixed effects, which is commonly interpreted as a direct effect. Vertical dashed lines indicate the true ATT in panel (a) and the true ADTT in panel (b). 12 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

3.3. Identification of direct effects. The diagnostic results above show that nei-ther the unconditional DiD contrast nor a TWFE regression controlling for the medi-ator generally recovers the direct effect. Hence, we propose an alternative approach; condition on the full observed mediator path pMi0, M i1q, construct a DiD contrast within each path, and then average these contrasts over the treated path distribu-tion. Define the conditional DiD estimand as 

τ DiD pm0, m 1q ” Er∆Yi | Di “ 1, M i0 “ m0, M i1 “ m1s´ Er∆Yi | Di “ 0, M i0 “ m0, M i1 “ m1s

Assumption 3 (Mediator path overlap and regularity) . The treatment is nondegen-erate conditional on the mediator path, 0 ă PpDi “ 1|Mi0, M i1q ă 1 a.s., the relevant first moments are finite. 

Proposition 1 (Identification of direct treatment effect) . Consider the structural model (2.1) . Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, the conditional average direct effect on the treated is identified as the conditional DiD estimand, 

CADT T pm0, m 1q ” Erθi | Di “ 1, M i0 “ m0, M i1 “ m1s “ τ DiD pm0, m 1q.

Consequently, the average direct effect on the treated is identified, 

ADT T ” Erθi | Di “ 1s “ E“τ DiD pMi0, M i1qˇˇDi “ 1‰

Proof. See Appendix A.3. □

The proposition shows that the conditional average direct effect on the treated is identified by the DiD estimand conditional on the mediator path. What is surprising is that identification does not require the associated conditional parallel trends as-sumption to hold. To see this, let ∆ Yip0q ” Yi1p0, M i1p0qq ´ Yi0p0, M i0p0qq . We show that 

Er∆Yip0q | Di “ 1, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s ´ Er∆Yip0q | Di “ 0, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s“ ´Erβi1s ¨ Erαi | Di “ 1, M i0 “ m0, M i1 “ m1s,DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 13 

which is nonzero if both the average mediator effect on the outcome, Erβi1s, and the conditional average treatment effect on the mediator, Erαi | Di “ 1, M i0 “ m0, M i1 “

m1s, are different from zero. In general, when treatment affects the mediator and the mediator in turn affects the outcome, the standard conditional parallel trends assumption will fail. The reason is that the observed mediator path (referred to as 

factual path ) is contaminated by the treatment, and when the mediator matters to explain the variations in the outcome, this contamination may translate into different trends for treatment and control groups. However, under Assumption 1 and 2, parallel trends conditional on untreated potential mediator path (referred to as counterfactual path ) holds, that is, 

ErYi1p0, m 1q ´ Yi0p0, m 0q | Di “ 1, M i1p0q “ m1, M i0p0q “ m0s“ ErYi1p0, m 1q ´ Yi0p0, m 0q | Di “ 0, M i1p0q “ m1, M i0p0q “ m0s.

The challenge is that the DiD estimand conditional on the counterfactual mediator path is infeasible. The result in Proposition 1 shows that the DiD conditional on the factual mediator path identifies the conditional average direct effect on the treated. By integrating over the distribution of the factual mediator path conditional on the treatment group, we can identify the ADTT as 

Erθi|Di “ 1s “

ż

τ DiD pm0, m 1qdF Mi0,M i1|Di“1pm0, m 1q“

ż

Er∆Yi|Di “ 1, M i0 “ m0, M i1 “ m1s´Er∆Yi|Di “ 0, M i0 “ m0, M i1 “ m1sdF Mi0,M i1|Di“1pm0, m 1q.

Remark 1 (Binary and discrete mediator paths) . The conditional DiD argument ex-tends to discrete or mixed mediators. These settings are special cases of the extension considered in Section 5.3.1. 

3.4. Identification of indirect and mediator effects. In general, while we show that the average direct effect is identifiable under our assumptions, the identification of the average indirect effect requires stronger assumptions, which may not be plau-sible in some applications. Define αDiD ” Er∆Mi | Di “ 1s ´ Er∆Mi | Di “ 0s, and consider the following assumption. 14 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

Assumption 4 (Stable average mediator effect) . Erβi1s “ Erβi0s

This assumption rules out any time trend in the coefficient βit (e.g., βit “ βi `f ptq). But, it allows for time heterogeneity in βit . It only requires that βit has the same mean over time (e.g., βit “ βi ` τit , where Erτit s “ 0). When this assumption is combined with the previous unconditional parallel trends assumption, the standard DiD esti-mand identifies the average total effect on the treated. The average indirect effect on the treated is therefore obtained as the residual difference between the standard DiD estimand and the integral of the conditional DiD over the conditional distribution of the factual mediator path for the treated group. The following proposition holds. 

Proposition 2. Consider the structural model (2.1) . Suppose αDiD ‰ 0. Then under Assumptions 1, 2, 3, and 4, Erβi1s is identified as 

Erβi1s “ τ DiD ´ ş τ DiD pMi1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0qdF Mi1,M i0|Di“1pm1, m 0q

αDiD .

Proof. See Appendix A.4. □

4. Potential outcome formulation 

We now extend the mediator path identification argument from the linear structural model to the general potential outcome framework. The structural model in Sections 2–3 is useful for showing why conventional estimands fail and why path conditioning works. The potential outcome formulation below states the same logic directly in terms of potential outcomes and potential mediator paths. Consider # Yit “ Yit p1, M it p1qq Di ` Yit p0, M it p0qqp 1 ´ Diq,Mit “ Mit p1qDi ` Mit p0qp 1 ´ Diq, (4.1) where Yit pd, m tq and Mit pdq are potential outcome and potential mediator when the treatment Di and the mediator Mit are exogenously set to d and mt, respectively. 

Assumption 5 (Conditional parallel trends) .

ErYi1p0, m 1q ´ Yi0p0, m 0q| Di “ 1, M i1p0q “ m1, M i0p0q “ m0sDID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 15 

“ ErYi1p0, m 1q ´ Yi0p0, m 0q| Di “ 0, M i1p0q “ m1, M i0p0q “ m0s for all m1, m 0.

This assumption states that conditional on the counterfactual mediator path 

pMi0p0q, M i1p0qq , the average potential outcome trend is independent of treatment status. As discussed earlier, Model (2.1) and Assumptions 1–2 imply this assumption. This assumption allows for a violation of parallel trends conditional on the observed mediator path pMi0, M i1q.

Assumption 6 (Conditional orthogonality between potential mediator and untreated potential outcome trends) .

ErYi1p0, m 1q ´ Yi0p0, m 0q| Di “ d, M i1p0q “ m1, M i0p0q “ m0s“ ErYi1p0, m 1q ´ Yi0p0, m 0q| Di “ d, M i1p1q “ m1, M i0p1q “ m0s for all m1, m 0, d. 

This assumption states that conditional on treatment status, the average potential outcome trend is independent of the potential mediator path. This assumption is also implied by Model (2.1) and Assumptions 1–2. The framework considered here covers settings where the sequential ignorability assumption in Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto (2010) could be violated. We leverage on the time dimension in the data structure to remove time-invariant factors that could compromise the validity of sequential ignorability. Assumptions 5 and 6 could be viewed as a generalization of sequential exogeneity to DiD settings. As is customary in the DiD literature, we also rely on the assumption that the treatment has no anticipatory effects on the outcome and mediator (Assumption 7). 

Assumption 7 (No anticipation effects) .

(i) Yi0p1, m q “ Yi0p0, m q, a.s. for all m.(ii) Mi0p1q “ Mi0p0q, a.s. 

The following proposition holds. 16 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

Proposition 3. In the potential outcome model (4.1) , under Assumptions 3, 5, 6, and 7(i), the results in Proposition 1 hold. 

As we discussed in the structural model in the previous section, the unconditional parallel trends assumption may not hold because of the heterogeneity in the medi-ator effect on the outcome and the dependence between the mediator path and the treatment. However, if one is willing to assume that parallel trends holds, then she can recover the average indirect effect. 

Assumption 8 (Unconditional parallel trends) .

ErY1p0, M 1p0qq ´ Y0p0, M 0p0qq| D “ 1s “ ErY1p0, M 1p0qq ´ Y0p0, M 0p0qq| D “ 0s

Under Assumptions 7 and 8, we can show that τ DiD “ ADT T ` AIT T . Therefore, the AITT is identified as the difference between the DiD estimand and the identified ADTT. Hence, the following proposition holds. 

Proposition 4. In the potential outcome model (4.1) , under Assumptions 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8, the AITT is identified: 

AIT T “ τ DiD ´

ż

τ DiD pm0, m 1qdF Mi0,M i1|Di“1pm0, m 1q.

The proof of this proposition is straightforward from the discussion above and is therefore omitted. 5. Extensions 

5.1. Multivariate mediators. In practice, there are multiple mediators that are responses to the treatment and influence the main outcome of interest. This section extends our identification results to multivariate mediators. DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 17 

5.1.1. Model and identification of average direct effect. Let Mit P RK be a vector of continuous mediators. The multivariate model is 

$’&’%

Yit “ θitD i ` β1

> it

Mit ` λi ` ηt ` Uit ,

Mit “ αitD i ` γi ` δt ` Vit ,Di “ hpλi, γi, ε iq.

(5.1) where βit , αi, γi, δt, Vit P RK . The average indirect effect on the treated is 

AIT T “ ErYi1p0, Mi1p1qq ´ Yi1p0, Mi1p0qq | Di “ 1s “ Erβ1

> i1

αi | Di “ 1s.

Assumption 9. 

(i) pλi, γi, ε iq|ù pt Vit , U it , βit ut“0,1, αiq.(ii) pt Vit ut“0,1, αiq|ù pt Uit , βit ut“0,1q | p λi, γi, ε iq.

(iii) 0 ă PpDi “ 1|Mi0, Mi1q ă 1 a.s. 

Let ∆ Yi ” Yi1 ´Yi0, ∆ Mi ” Mi1 ´Mi0. For pm0, m1q in the treated mediator-path support, define the path-conditional DiD estimand 

τ DiD pm0, m1q ” Er∆Yi | Di “ 1, Mi0 “ m0, Mi1 “ m1s´ Er∆Yi | Di “ 0, Mi0 “ m0, Mi1 “ m1s.

Define the vector mediator DiD estimand 

αDiD ” Er∆Mi | Di “ 1s ´ Er∆Mi | Di “ 0s.

Proposition 5 (Direct effect and mediator response with multivariate mediators) .

Consider the multivariate-mediator structural model (5.1) . Under Assumption 9, 

Erαis “ αDiD , and 

ADT T ” Erθi | Di “ 1s “ 

ż

τ DiD pm0, m1q dF Mi0,Mi1|Di“1pm0, m1q “ Erτ DiD pMi0, Mi1q| Di “ 1s.

The proof of this proposition is similar to that of Proposition 1 and is therefore omitted. 18 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

Under the stable mediator effect assumption ( Erβi1s “ Erβi0s), we can recover the average indirect effect AITT as the residual difference between the standard DiD estimand and the average direct effect ADTT. In general, when the mediator effect is heterogeneous over time, we cannot recover the AITT without further assumptions. 5.2. Extension to Nonlinear Difference-in-Differences. We consider the model below where the treatment is binary, D P t 0, 1u, and there are two time periods, 

t P t 0, 1u. This model is an extension of the changes-in-changes model in Athey and Imbens (2006) to include a mediator. We drop the subscript i here for simplicity. 

# Yt “ gtptD, M t, U tq

Mt “ ψtptD, V tq (5.2) In the above model, Ut is a scalar unobservable, while Vt is a vector of unobservables. 

gt and ψt are unknown functions. 

Assumption 10. 

(i) U1|D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1 „d U0|D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1.(ii) The function gtp0, m t, . q is continuous and strictly increasing. (iii) Supp tUt|D “ 1, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1u Ď Supp tUt|D “ 0, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1u.

Assumption 10(i) states that the distribution of the outcome unobserved hetero-geneity Ut conditional on pD, M 0, M 1q is stable over time. Assumption 10(ii) is a smoothness and monotonicity condition that ensures that the function gtp0, m t, . q is invertible. Assumption 10(iii) is a support condition that requires that the support of the outcome unobserved heterogeneity Ut for the treated group conditional on the joint vector pM0, M 1q is included in that of the control group. These assumptions combined imply that the counterfactual distribution PpY1p0, m 1q ď y|D “ 1, M 0 “

m0, M 1 “ m1q is identified, which helps identify the average direct effect ADTT. Define Ytp0, m tq ” gtp0, m t, U tq, and Ytp0, M tp0qq ” gtp0, M tp0q, U tq.

Proposition 6. Under Assumption 10, we have 

PpY1p1, m 1q ď y|D “ 1, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q “ PpY1 ď y|D “ 1, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q,DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 19 

PpY1p0, m 1q ď y|D “ 1, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q “ 

FY0|D“1,M 0“m0,M 1“m1

´

F ´1 

> Y0|D“0,M 0“m0,M 1“m1

pFY1|D“0,M 0“m0,M 1“m1 pyqq 

¯

Proof. See Appendix A.6. □

5.3. Multiple treatment periods. 

5.3.1. Multiple treatment periods with no dynamic treatment effects. Consider the following model specification: for t P T ” t 0, 1, . . . , T u,

$’’&’’%

Yit “ θit Dit ` βit Mit ` λi ` ηt ` Uit ,Mit “ ψtpDit , γ i, ˜Vit q,Dit “ htpλi, γ i, ε it q,

(5.3) where Dit is a binary treatment indicator for individual i at time t, and θit is the direct effect of the treatment on the outcome, which is allowed to vary across individuals and time. The variables ˜Vit and εit could be multivariate. All other variables are the same as described in the model (2.1). In the baseline period pt “ 0q, no individuals are treated ( Di0 “ 0 for all i). This model assumes that past and future treatment statuses do not influence the current outcome and mediator. A similar restriction has been imposed on the outcome in de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) in the absence of mediators. The functions ψt and ht are unrestricted. For example, when the mediator M is continuous, we can set ψtpDit , γ i, ˜Vit q “ αit Dit ` γi ` δt ` Vit , where ˜Vit “ p αit , V it q.When the mediator M is binary, we can set ψtpDit , γ i, ˜Vit q “ 1tαit Dit ` γi ` δt ` Vit ą

0u. A generalized version of the identifying assumption in the two-period setting is given in Assumption 11 below. 

Assumption 11. 

(i) pλi, γ i, tεit utPT q|ù pt ˜Vit , U it , β it utPT q.(ii) t ˜Vit utPT

> |ù

pt Uit , β it utPT q|p λi, γ i, tεit utPT q.(iii) 0 ă PpDit “ 1|Mi0, M it q ă 1 a.s. 20 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

Under Assumption 11, the standard parallel trends assumption may not hold for the outcome and the mediator. The mediator can be continuous, discrete, or mixed. Define ∆ Yit ” Yit ´ Yi0 and ∆ Mit ” Mit ´ Mi0. The proposition below generalizes the results in Proposition 1. 

Proposition 7. Under Assumption 11, the conditional average direct effect on the contemporaneous treated group is identified as 

Erθit |Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s “ Er∆Yit |Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s´Er∆Yit |Dit “ 0, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s.

The above estimand can be integrated over the distribution of the vector pMit , M i0q

conditional on the contemporaneous treatment group Dit “ 1 to obtain the average direct effect on the treated group. More precisely, the following holds. 

Erθit |Dit “ 1s “

ż

Er∆Yit |Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s (5.4) 

´Er∆Yit |Dit “ 0, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0sdF Mit ,M i0|Dit “1pmt, m 0q.

Proof. See Appendix A.7. □

When ψtp1, γ i, ˜Vit q “ ψtp0, γ i, ˜Vit q a.s., then Mit is a standard time-varying covari-ate. The identification strategy developed in this paper still applies. To understand the relevance of the results in Proposition 7, we devote a special attention to the unconditional DiD estimand Er∆Yit |Dit “ 1s ´ Er∆Yit |Dit “ 0s.Under Assumption 11, we can show that 

Er∆Yit |Dit “ 1s ´ Er∆Yit |Dit “ 0s “ Erθit |Dit “ 1s`Erβit sp ErMit |Dit “ 1s ´ ErMit |Dit “ 0sq ´Erβi0sp ErMi0|Dit “ 1s ´ ErMi0|Dit “ 0sq .

The term Erβit sp ErMit |Dit “ 1s ´ ErMit |Dit “ 0sq ´ Erβi0sp ErMi0|Dit “ 1s ´ 

ErMi0|Dit “ 0sq is the bias that stems from ignoring the mediator M . We call it the 

mediator bias . If the average mediator effect is stable over time, (i.e., Erβit s “ Erβi0s), DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 21 

then we can recover this effect as the ratio between the DiD estimand for Y net of the identified average direct effect and the DiD estimand for M

Erβi0s “ pEr∆Yit |Dit “ 1s ´ Er∆Yit |Dit “ 0sq ´ Erθit |Dit “ 1s

Er∆Mit |Dit “ 1s ´ Er∆Mit |Dit “ 0s ,

where Erθit |Dit “ 1s is identified in (5.4). Note that we do not require parallel trends for the mediator to identify this quantity. First, when the mediator has no effect on the outcome (i.e., βit “ 0 for all i

and t), then the unconditional DiD estimand Er∆Yit |Dit “ 1s ´ Er∆Yit |Dit “ 0s

identifies the average direct effect on the treated, Erθit |Dit “ 1s. In such a case ∆Yit “ θit Dit ` ηt ´ η0 ` Uit ´ Ui0, and we have 

Er∆Yit |Dit s “ Erθit |Dit sDit ` ηt ´ η0 ` ErUit ´ Ui0|Dit s,

“ Erθit |Dit sDit ` ηt ´ η0 ` ErUit ´ Ui0s, under Assumption 11 ,

“ θtDit ` ˜ηt.

One can run a cross-sectional regression for each period t P t 1, . . . , T u,

∆Yit “ θtDit ` ˜ηt ` eit . (5.5) One can alternatively run the saturated regression to obtain the whole parameter vector pθ1, , . . . , θ T q with a joint covariance matrix, ∆Yit “

> T

ÿ

> s“1

˜ηs1tt “ su ` 

> T

ÿ

> s“1

θsDit 1tt “ su ` eit . (5.6) Second, when ψtpDit , γ i, ˜Vit q “ αit Dit `γi `δt `Vit , then the mediator bias simplifies to 

Erβit s Erαit s ` Erβit ´ βi0s`Erγi | Dit “ 1s ´ Erγi | Dit “ 0s˘.

This mediator bias becomes the average indirect effect when the mediator effect βit is on average stable over time (i.e., Erβit s “ Erβi0s) or the treatment selection variable, 

Dit , is independent of the mediator fixed effects. In such a case, the standard parallel trends assumption holds for the outcome and the mediator (because of the linear two-way fixed effects specification). 22 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

Remark 2 (Multiple pre-treatment periods) . When there are multiple pre-treatment periods, we can use the fact that the identification of Erθit |Dit “ 1s does not depend on a specific pre-treatment period to check for violations of our identifying assumptions. More precisely, suppose that there are T0 multiple pre-treatment periods. For t0 Pt´ T0, . . . , 0u, define ∆Y t0 

> it

” Yit ´ Yit 0 . Since no individuals were treated in the pre-treatment periods, we have Dit 0 “ 0 for all t0 P t´ T0, . . . , 0u. Suppose that model (5.3) 

and Assumption 11 hold for t P T “ t´ T0, . . . , 0, . . . , T u. Then, 

Erθit |Dit “ 1s “

ż

Er∆Y t0 

> it

|Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M it 0 “ mt0 s´Er∆Y t0 

> it

|Dit “ 0, M it “ mt, M it 0 “ mt0 sdF Mit ,M it 0 |Dit “1pmt, m t0 q.

for all t0 P t´ T0, . . . , 0u. So, we can test for whether the above estimand is constant across values of t0 for each t P t 1, . . . , T u.

5.3.2. Multiple treatment periods with staggered adoption and dynamic treatment ef-fects. We modify the model specification (5.3) to allow the outcome to depend on past or future treatments. The staggered adoption model we consider is the following. For 

t P T “ t 0, . . . , T u,

$’’&’’%

Yit “ přTg“1 θgit Dgi q1tt ą 0u ` βit Mit ` λi ` ηt ` Uit ,Mit “ přTg“1 αgit Dgi q1tt ą 0u ` γi ` δt ` Vit ,Dit “ 1thpλi, γ i, ε iq ď t, t ą 0u,

(5.7) where Dgi is the indicator for whether individual i receives treatment for the first time in period g or not, and θgit is the direct effect of individual i receiving treatment for the first time in period g on her outcome in period t. Let G ” t 1, . . . , T, 8u .

Assumption 12. 

(i) pλi, γ i, ε iq|ù pt Vit , U it , β it , tαgit : g P T uu tPT q.(ii) pt Vit , tαgit : g P T uu tPT q|ù pt Uit , β it utPT q| λi, γ i, ε i.(iii) 0 ă PpDgi “ 1|Mi0, M it q ă 1 a.s. for all g P G.

Assumption 12 implies pt Vit , tαgit : g P T uu tPT , λ i, γ i, ε iq|ù  pt Uit , β it utPT q. We can show that under this assumption, the conditional average direct treatment effect on DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 23 

the treated is identified: 

Erθgit |Dgi “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s “ Er∆Yit |Dgi “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s´Er∆Yit |D8 

> i

“ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s,

where D8 

> i

an indicator for the never-treated group. We can obtain the average direct effect on the treated as 

Erθgit |Dgi “ 1s “

ż

Er∆Yit |Dgi “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s´Er∆Yit |D8 

> i

“ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0sdF Mit ,M i0|Dgi “1pmt, m 0q.

6. Empirical illustration: railroads and market access 

The mediator-path identification result writes the ADT T as a conditional DiD es-timand averaged over the mediator-path distribution of treated units. We implement this estimand using the doubly robust estimator of Sant’Anna and Zhao (2020). To keep the application aligned with the notation used throughout the paper, Y de-notes the outcome, M the mediator, D the treatment, and X the baseline covariates throughout this section. We reserve W for the target-specific conditioning vector used in a given doubly robust specification. 6.1. Questions, sample, and empirical design. Donaldson and Hornbeck’s prin-cipal object is the aggregate contribution of the national railroad network to the agricultural sector in 1890 (Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016). They first estimate how changes in county market access between 1870 and 1890 are capitalized into agricul-tural land values. They then calculate how much each county’s market access would fall if all railroads were removed from the 1890 transportation network and aggregate the implied land-value losses. Their headline conclusion is that removing all railroads would reduce the total value of U.S. agricultural land by 60 .2%, with annual losses equal to 3 .22% of GNP. In their framework, market access is constructed to summarize the direct and in-direct spatial general-equilibrium effects of changes in the national railroad network. Their use of the terms “direct” and “indirect” therefore does not correspond to the natural direct and indirect treatment effects studied in this paper. Likewise, the 24 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

local-railroad controls in their Table II assess whether the estimated relationship be-tween market access and land value is robust to conditioning on own and nearby railroad construction; those controls are not used to construct a causal mediation decomposition. Our illustration instead asks a local-adoption question. Let t “ 0 denote 1870 and 

t “ 1 denote 1890. For county o, let Yot denote the log value of agricultural land and buildings, let Mot denote log cost-based market access, and define the baseline geographic covariates as 

Xo “ p lon o, lat oq1,

where lon o and lat o denote, respectively, the longitude and latitude of the geographic centroid of county o. The treatment indicator Do equals one if county o had no railroad track in 1870 but had track in 1890, and equals zero if the county had no track in either year. Under the maintained assumptions, we report the total effect of local railroad adoption on Y , the mediator response of M , the ADT T identified through mediator-path conditioning, and the residual AIT T .We begin with the 2 ,327-county balanced regression sample used in the Donaldson– Hornbeck baseline specification. Restricting the sample to counties without railroad track in 1870 excludes the 1 ,272 counties that already had track, leaving 1 ,055 coun-ties observed in both periods. Of these counties, 730 are treated and 325 are controls. Because Mot is a network object, it can change for control counties when railroad track is constructed elsewhere. By contrast, Do represents whether the county it-self adopts railroad track between the two periods and stays zero for all counties in the baseline period. We report standard errors using state-clustered CR0 stacked-sandwich covariances and use the delta method where needed. The results without baseline covariates are discussed in Table 4 in the Appendix. Throughout the application, the average direct effect on the treated, ADT T , is the component not transmitted through the mediator, the measured cost-based market-access. It can therefore contain depot-town activity, local commerce, amenities, and omitted dimensions or spillovers of market access. Because each county’s outcome and market access evolve with the realized national network, the estimated ADT T is DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 25 

a local-adoption effect in that network, not the no-interference effect of changing the county’s track status while holding the rest of the network fixed. 6.2. TWFE and doubly robust specifications. For the original-control TWFE benchmark, define the separate cubic geographic basis 

bgeo pXoq “ `lon o, lon 2

> o

, lon 3

> o

, lat o, lat 2

> o

, lat 3

> o

˘1.

For county o in state spoq and period t P t 0, 1u, we estimate 

Yot “ π1tD o ` π2Mot ` ϕo ` ζspoq,t ` bgeo pXoq1χt ` ξot , (6.1) where ϕo, ζspoq,t , and bgeo pXoq1χt represent county fixed effects, state-by-period fixed effects, and the cubic geographic trends used in Equation (13) of Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), and tD o denotes local railroad adoption. In Table 1, the TWFE total effects are obtained by omitting Mot from (6.1), and the direct effect and the M Ñ Y effect are estimates of π1 and π2, respectively. The TWFE indirect effects are estimated as the total coefficient minus π1. Recall that the direct and indirect effects obtained from the TWFE regressions are descriptive, not causal, by Claim 1. The two TWFE benchmarks use the same 1 ,055 counties and equal observation weights, but they differ in their covariate selection. The original-control column contains state-by-period effects and the cubic geographic basis in (6.1), whereas the same-controls column replaces them with common period effects and linear trends in 

Xo, matching the sample, weights, and baseline covariates in the DR specifications. Comparing that column with DR therefore holds the observed covariate set fixed and therefore helps separate differences due to the estimator from differences due to the richer original-control specification. The doubly robust columns implement the improved estimator of Sant’Anna and Zhao (2020). For the total effect and the mediator response, the conditioning vector is 

Wo “ Xo.

For the direct effect, the linear mediator-path specification uses 

Wo “ p Mo0, M o1, X1

> o

q1,26 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

whereas the additive-quadratic mediator-path specification uses 

Wo “ p Mo0, M 2

> o0

, M o1, M 2

> o1

, X1

> o

q1.

> 4

The DR specification cannot retain the original state and cubic controls. Eight of the 37 represented states contain treated counties but no controls, so treated-support overlap fails within those states; one additional state contains controls only. We therefore define the same-controls TWFE column with the linear geographic pair Xo,which is the covariate set used in the DR fits. 6.3. Average effects. As discussed above, Table 1 shows contrasts in direct and indirect effects between TWFE approaches and DR specifications under our assump-tions, while the total effect estimates are stable across designs when the covariate set is held fixed. In particular, the direct effect estimate is statistically indistinguishable from zero under the TWFE specification with linear geographic controls but is 0 .429 

p0.177 q under our preferred linear path DR specification. Also, we notice the sign reversal in indirect effect estimates from 0 .258 p0.118 q to ´0.039 p0.141 q, yet the lat-ter is not statistically significant. Under the additive-quadratic path model, the DR estimates remain qualitatively similar to the preferred linear path DR estimates, but the direct estimate loses precision. The overlap diagnostics suggest treating this as a sensitivity analysis, not as a second preferred specification. 7. Summary and Discussion 

We study DiD designs where treatment changes a time-varying mediator and the mediator also affects the outcome. In such settings, policymakers may want to know the direct effect of the policy on an outcome and how much of the policy effect operates through the mediator. However, a challenge is that the mediator is endogenous and affected by the treatment, and the conventional DiD estimand may not have a clear   

> 4“Quadratic” in Table 1 refers to separate squared terms in the two mediator coordinates and does not include the interaction Mo0Mo1.DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 27

Table 1. Local railroad adoption and market-access mediation, 1870–1890 

TWFE Doubly Robust Original controls Same controls Linear path Additive quadratic (1) (2) (3) (4) 

D Ñ Y (Total) -0.109 0.348 ˚˚ 0.390 ˚˚ 0.390 ˚˚ 

(0.087) (0.147) (0.158) (0.158) 

D Ñ Y (Direct) -0.253 ˚˚˚ 0.090 0.429 ˚˚ 0.525 ˚

(0.098) (0.175) (0.177) (0.275) 

D Ñ M 0.376 ˚˚˚ 0.656 ˚˚˚ 0.698 ˚˚˚ 0.698 ˚˚˚ 

(0.054) (0.100) (0.107) (0.107) 

M Ñ Y 0.384 ˚˚˚ 0.394 ˚˚ -0.055 -0.193 (0.114) (0.178) (0.204) (0.386) 

D Ñ M Ñ Y (Indirect) 0.144 ˚˚˚ 0.258 ˚˚ -0.039 -0.135 (0.043) (0.118) (0.141) (0.262) Covariate adjustment State + cubic geo. Linear geo. Linear geo. Linear geo. Observations 2,110 2,110 2,110 2,110 

Notes : Columns (1) and (2) are descriptive TWFE decompositions. Their rows report, in order, the total local-adoption effect coefficient from the outcome regression without M , that coefficient after adding M , targeting the direct effect, the local-adoption effect coefficient from the mediator regression, the coefficient on M in the outcome regression, and the difference between the first two coefficients. The specification of Column (1) uses state-by-period effects and separate cubic terms in longitude and latitude. Column (2) uses the same 1 ,055 counties, equal observation weights, and linear geographic covariates as Column (3). Columns (3) and (4) report DR estimates of AT T , ADT T , the treatment effect on M , the mediator-effect ratio, and AIT T under our framework. The sample consists of 730 adopters and 325 controls observed in two periods. Standard errors use a joint state-clustered CR0 stacked-sandwich covariance across 37 states, and the last two rows use the delta method. ˚, ˚˚ , and ˚˚˚ denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% , respectively. 

causal interpretation. Hence, neither ignoring the mediator nor adding it as a time-varying control in a TWFE regression generally helps identify the desired policy effects. Instead, Proposition 1 identifies CADT T pm0, m 1q by comparing outcome changes across treatment groups at a common observed mediator path, and integrating this contrast over treated paths yields ADT T . The result does not require parallel trends 28 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

conditional on the factual mediator path under our framework, and Claim 1 explains why including Mit in TWFE does not produce the same object. Under the addition of Assumption 4, the unconditional outcome and mediator DiD moments also identify the indirect effect and the average mediator coefficient when the mediator response is nonzero. One lesson for applied work, not only practical but also important, is that a post-treatment mediator should not be treated as an ordinary control in a DiD regression. Conditioning on the mediator path can be useful, but the target parameter and the assumptions differ from those underlying standard covariate-adjusted DiD. This is not a mere claim but is highlighted in the empirical illustrations that we con-sider. In the railroad application, the linear DR path model estimates ADT T “ 0.429 and AIT T “ ´ 0.039, with the latter imprecisely estimated. On the other hand, the same-controls TWFE claims that the direct effect is 0 .090 and cannot be statistically distinguished from zero. The second application, Alcohol Prohibition and Farm Pro-ductivity, which is reported in the Appendix, similarly shows the difference between the standard TWFE framework and our approach in the models with covariates. However, there are several limitations pointing to useful directions for future work. First, the identifying assumptions considered here restrict the dependence between mediator shocks and outcome shocks after conditioning on the unobservables that determine treatment selection. Also, the identification of the indirect effect relies on the stability of the average mediator effect, and relaxing this restriction would require additional sources of variation or partial identification arguments. 

References 

Athey, Susan and Guido W. Imbens. 2006. “Identification and Inference in Nonlinear Difference-in-Differences Models.” Econometrica 74 (2):431–497. Brown, Nicholas L., Kyle Butts, and Joakim Westerlund. 2026. “Direct and Indirect Treatment Effects With Time-Varying Covariates.” Journal of Applied Economet-rics .Caetano, Carolina and Brantly Callaway. 2024. “Difference-in-differences when par-allel trends holds conditional on covariates.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15288 .Callaway, Brantly and Pedro HC Sant’Anna. 2021. “Difference-in-differences with multiple time periods.” Journal of econometrics 225 (2):200–230. DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 29 

Celli, Viviana. 2022. “Causal Mediation Analysis in Economics: Objectives, Assump-tions, Models.” Journal of Economic Surveys 36 (1):214–234. de Chaisemartin, Cl´ ement and Xavier D’Haultfœuille. 2020. “Two-Way Fixed Effects Estimators with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects.” American Economic Review 

110 (9):2964–2996. Deuchert, Eva, Martin Huber, and Mark Schelker. 2019. “Direct and Indirect Effects Based on Difference-in-Differences With an Application to Political Preferences Following the Vietnam Draft Lottery.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 

37 (4):710–720. Donaldson, Dave and Richard Hornbeck. 2016. “Railroads and American Eco-nomic Growth: A “Market Access” Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 

131 (2):799–858. Farbmacher, Helmut, Martin Huber, Luk´ aˇ s Laff´ ers, Henrika Langen, and Martin Spindler. 2022. “Causal Mediation Analysis with Double Machine Learning.” The Econometrics Journal 25 (2):277–300. Howard, Greg and Arianna Ornaghi. 2021. “Closing time: The local equilibrium effects of prohibition.” The Journal of Economic History 81 (3):792–830. Hsia, Pei Hsuan, An Shun Tai, Chu Lan Michael Kao, Yu Hsuan Lin, and Sheng Hsuan Lin. 2025. “Causal Mediation Analysis for Difference-in-Difference Design and Panel Data.” Epidemiologic Methods 14 (1):20240025. Huber, Martin and Sarina Joy Oberh¨ ansli. 2026. “Difference-in-differences for me-diation analysis using double machine learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.23877 

.Imai, Kosuke, Luke Keele, and Teppei Yamamoto. 2010. “Identification, Inference and Sensitivity Analysis for Causal Mediation Effects.” Statistical Science 25. Kim, Doosoo and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. 2025. “Difference-in-Differences Estimator of Quantile Treatment Effect on the Treated.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 43 (2):401–412. Pearl, Judea. 2001. “Direct and Indirect Effects.” In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence . San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 411–420. 30 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

Robins, James M. and Sander Greenland. 1992. “Identifiability and Exchangeability for Direct and Indirect Effects.” Epidemiology 3 (2):143–155. Sant’Anna, Pedro HC and Jun Zhao. 2020. “Doubly robust difference-in-differences estimators.” Journal of econometrics 219 (1):101–122. Schenk, Timo. 2024. “Mediation Analysis in Difference-in-Differences Designs.” Working paper, Aarhus University. VanderWeele, Tyler J. 2014. “A Unification of Mediation and Interaction: A 4-Way Decomposition.” Epidemiology 25 (5):749–761. Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2023. “Simple Approaches to Nonlinear Difference-in-Differences with Panel Data.” The Econometrics Journal 26 (3):C31–C66. DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 31 

Appendix A. Proofs of Main Results 

A.1. Proof of Lemma 1. 

Proof. Assumptions 1 and 2 imply 

$’&’%

pUi0, U i1, β i0, β i1q|ù pVi0, V i1, α iq,

pUi0, U i1, β i0, β i1q|ù pλi, γ i, ε iq,

pλi, γ i, ε iq|ù pVi0, V i1, α iq,

Therefore, pUi0, U i1, β i0, β i1q|ù pVi0, V i1, α i, λ i, γ i, ε iq. In fact, 

FpVi0,V i1,α i,ε i,λ i,γ i,U i0,U i1,β i0,β i1q “ FpVi0,V i1,α i,U i0,U i1,β i0,β i1q|p λi,γ i,ε iqFpλi,γ i,ε iq,

“ FpVi0,V i1,α iq|p λi,γ i,ε iqFpUi0,U i1,β i0,β i1q|p λi,γ i,ε iqFpλi,γ i,ε iq under Assumption 2 ,

“ FpVi0,V i1,α iq|p λi,γ i,ε iqFpUi0,U i1,β i0,β i1qFpλi,γ i,ε iq under Assumption 1 ,

“ FpVi0,V i1,α i,λ i,γ i,ε iqFpUi0,U i1,β i0,β i1q.

□

A.2. Proof of Claim 1. 

Proof. Define 

rDi ” Di ´ ΠpDi | ∆Miq “ Di ´ EpDiq ´ Cov pDi, ∆Miq

V ar p∆Miq p∆Mi ´ Ep∆Miqq 

Ć∆Mi ” ∆Mi ´ Πp∆Mi | Diq “ ∆Mi ´ Ep∆Miq ´ Cov pDi, ∆Miq

V ar pDiq pDi ´ EpDiqq 

Since we only have two periods, the fixed effect estimand and the first difference estimand are numerically identical. Therefore, by Frisch–Waugh–Lovell theorem, 

π1 “ Cov p rDi, ∆Yiq

V ar p rDiq“ 1

V ar p rDiq

#

Cov pDi, θ iDiq ` Cov pDi, β i1∆Miq ` Cov pDi, pβi1 ´ βi0qMi0q´ Cov pDi, ∆Miq

V ar p∆Miq rCov p∆Mi, θ iDiq ` Cov p∆Mi, β i1∆Miq ` Cov p∆Mi, pβi1 ´ βi0qMi0qs 

+

“ 1

V ar p rDiq

#

Cov pDi, θ iDiq ` EpαiqEpβi1qV ar pDiq ` Epβi1 ´ βi0qCov pDi, γ iq32 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

´ EpαiqV ar pDiq

V ar p∆Miq rCov p∆Mi, θ iDiq ` Epβi1qV ar p∆Miq ` Epβi1 ´ βi0qCov p∆Mi, M i0qs 

+

“ 1

V ar p rDiq

#

Cov pDi, θ iDiq ` Epβi1 ´ βi0qCov pDi, γ iq´ EpαiqV ar pDiq

V ar p∆Miq rCov p∆Mi, θ iDiq ` Epβi1 ´ βi0qCov p∆Mi, M i0qs ´ EpαiqV ar pDiq

V ar p∆Miq rEpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiq ´ EpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiqs 

+

“ 1

V ar p rDiq

#

Cov pDi, θ iDiq

ˆ

1 ´ Epαiq2V ar pDiq

V ar p∆Miq

˙

` Epβi1 ´ βi0q

ˆ

Cov pDi, γ iq ´ EpαiqV ar pDiq

V ar p∆Miq Cov p∆Mi, M i0q

˙

´ EpαiqV ar pDiq

V ar p∆Miq rCov p∆Mi, θ iDiq ´ EpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiqs 

+

“ Cov pDi, θ iDiq

V ar pDiq ` Epβi1 ´ βi0q

˜

Cov pDi, γ iq

V ar p rDiq ´ EpαiqCov p∆Mi, M i0q

V ar p Ć∆Miq

¸

` Epαiq

V ar p Ć∆Miq pEpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiq ´ Cov p∆Mi, θ iDiqq “Epθi | Di “ 1q ` Epβi1 ´ βi0q

˜

Cov pDi, γ iq

V ar p rDiq ´ EpαiqCov p∆Mi, M i0q

V ar p Ć∆Miq

¸

` Epαiq

V ar p Ć∆Miq pEpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiq ´ Cov p∆Mi, θ iDiqq 

The second equality follows from model 2.1 and Lemma 1, and the third equality follows from the following observations: 

Cov pDi, β i1∆Miq “ EpαiqEpβi1qV ar pDiq

Cov pDi, pβi1 ´ βi0qMi0q “ Epβi1 ´ βi0qCov pDi, γ iq

Cov pDi, ∆Miq “ EpαiqV ar pDiq

Cov p∆Mi, β i1∆Miq “ Epβi1qV ar p∆Miq

Cov p∆Mi, pβi1 ´ βi0qMi0q “ Epβi1 ´ βi0qCov p∆Mi, M i0q

For the fourth equality, the term Epβi1qV ar p∆Miq cancels out, and we add and subtract 

EpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiq. The fifth equality then follows by reorganizing and factoring terms. DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 33 

The sixth equality holds by V ar p ˜Diq “ V ar pDiq ´ Epαiq2V ar pDiq2 

> V ar p∆Miq

and V ar pDiq  

> V ar p˜Diq

“ V ar p∆Miq  

> V ar pĆ∆Miq

.The last one holds by Cov pDi,θ iDiq 

> V ar pDiq

“ Epθi | Di “ 1q

Analogously, 

π2 “ Cov p Ć∆Mi, ∆Yiq

V ar p Ć∆Miq“ 1

V ar p Ć∆Miq

#

Cov p∆Mi, θ iDiq ` Cov p∆Mi, pβi1 ´ βi0qMi0q ` Cov p∆Mi, β i1∆Miq´ Cov p∆Mi, D iq

V ar pDiq rCov pDi, θ iDiq ` Cov pDi, pβi1 ´ βi0qMi0q ` Cov pDi, β i1∆Miqs 

+

“ 1

V ar p Ć∆Miq

#

Cov p∆Mi, θ iDiq ` Epβi1 ´ βi0qCov p∆Mi, M i0q ` Epβi1qV ar p∆Miq´ Epαiq r Cov pDi, θ iDiq ` Epβi1 ´ βi0qCov pDi, γ iq ` EpαiqEpβi1qV ar pDiqs 

+

“ 1

V ar p Ć∆Miq

#

Epβi1q “V ar p∆Miq ´ Epαiq2V ar pDiq‰ ` Cov p∆Mi, θ iDiq ´ EpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiq

Epβi1 ´ βi0q r Cov p∆Mi, M i0q ´ EpαiqCov pDi, γ iqs 

+

“Epβi1q ` Epβi1 ´ βi0q

V ar p Ć∆Miq rCov p∆Mi, M i0q ´ EpαiqCov pDi, γ iqs ` 1

V ar p Ć∆Miq

“Cov p∆Mi, θ iDiq ´ EpαiqCov pDi, θ iDiq‰

The third equality uses Cov p∆Mi, D iq “ EpαiqV ar pDiq. The fourth equality is ob-tained by collecting terms, and the fifth equality follows from V ar p Ć∆Miq “ V ar p∆Miq ´ 

Epαiq2V ar pDiq. □

A.3. Proof of Proposition 1. 

Proof. 

τ DiD pm0, m 1q” Er∆Yi|Di “ 1, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s ´ Er∆Yi|Di “ 0, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s,

“ ErθiDi ` βi1Mi1 ´ βi0Mi0 ` η1 ´ η0 ` Ui1 ´ Ui0|Di “ 1, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s34 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

´ErθiDi ` βi1Mi1 ´ βi0Mi0 ` η1 ´ η0 ` Ui1 ´ Ui0|Di “ 0, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s,

“ Erθi|Di “ 1, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s`Erβi1m1 ´ βi0m0 ` η1 ´ η0 ` Ui1 ´ Ui0|hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ 1, M i1p1q “ m1, M i0p1q “ m0s´Erβi1m1 ´ βi0m0 ` η1 ´ η0 ` Ui1 ´ Ui0|hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ 0, M i1p0q “ m1, M i0p0q “ m0s,

“ Erθi|Di “ 1, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s`Erβi1m1 ´ βi0m0 ` η1 ´ η0 ` Ui1 ´ Ui0|hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ 1,αi ` γi ` δ1 ` Vi1 “ m1, γ i ` δ0 ` Vi0 “ m0s´Erβi1m1 ´ βi0m0 ` η1 ´ η0 ` Ui1 ´ Ui0|hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ 0,γi ` δ1 ` Vi1 “ m1, γ i ` δ0 ` Vi0 “ m0s,

“ Erθi|Di “ 1, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s ` Erβi1m1 ´ βi0m0 ` η1 ´ η0 ` Ui1 ´ Ui0s´Erβi1m1 ´ βi0m0 ` η1 ´ η0 ` Ui1 ´ Ui0s

because pUi0, U i1, β i0, β i1q|ù pVi0, V i1, α i, λ i, γ i, ε iq,

“ Erθi|Di “ 1, M i1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0s.

□

A.4. Proof of Proposition 2. 

Proof. We have shown in the main text that 

τ DiD “ Erθi|Di “ 1s ` Erβi1sErαis`Erγipβi1 ´ βi0q| hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ 1s ´ Erγipβi1 ´ βi0q| hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ 0s.

Using the law of iterated expectations, we can write for d P t 0, 1u

Erγipβi1 ´ βi0q| hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ ds “ ErγiErp βi1 ´ βi0q| hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ d, γ is| hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ ds,

“ ErγiErβi1 ´ βi0s| hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ ds

under Assumption 1 ,

“ Erβi1 ´ βi0sErγi|hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ ds,

“ pErβi1s ´ Erβi0sq Erγi|hpλi, γ i, ε iq “ ds,

“ 0 under Assumption 4 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 35 

Therefore, τ DiD “ Erθi|Di “ 1s` Erβi1sErαis. Under Assumption 1, Erαis is identified as the DiD estimand for the mediator, Erαis “ αDiD because parallel trends for the mediator holds under our model. Hence, 

Erβi1s “ τ DiD ´ Erθi|Di “ 1s

αDiD ,

“ τ DiD ´ ş τ DiD pMi1 “ m1, M i0 “ m0qdF Mi1,M i0|Di“1pm1, m 0q

αDiD .

□

A.5. Proof of Proposition 3. 

Proof. We have 

τ DiD pm0, m 1q “ ErY1 ´ Y0|D “ 1, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s´ ErY1 ´ Y0|D “ 0, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s,

“ ErY1p1, m 1q ´ Y0p1, m 0q| D “ 1, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s´ErY1p0, m 1q ´ Y0p0, m 0q| D “ 0, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s,

“ ErY1p1, m 1q ´ Y1p0, m 1q| D “ 1, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s`ErY1p0, m 1q ´ Y0p1, m 0q| D “ 1, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s´ErY1p0, m 1q ´ Y0p0, m 0q| D “ 0, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s,

“ ErY1p1, m 1q ´ Y1p0, m 1q| D “ 1, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s`ErY1p0, m 1q ´ Y0p0, m 0q| D “ 1, M 1p1q “ m1, M 0p1q “ m0s

under Ass. 7(i) 

´ErY1p0, m 1q ´ Y0p0, m 0q| D “ 0, M 1p0q “ m1, M 0p0q “ m0s,

“ ErY1p1, M 1p1qq ´ Y1p0, M 1p1qq| D “ 1, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s`ErY1p0, m 1q ´ Y0p0, m 0q| D “ 1, M 1p1q “ m1, M 0p1q “ m0s´ErY1p0, m 1q ´ Y0p0, m 0q| D “ 1, M 1p0q “ m1, M 0p0q “ m0s

under Ass. 5 ,

“ ErY1p1, M 1p1qq ´ Y1p0, M 1p1qq| D “ 1, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s`ErY1p0, m 1q ´ Y0p0, m 0q| D “ 1, M 1p0q “ m1, M 0p0q “ m0s36 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

under Ass. 6 

´ErY1p0, m 1q ´ Y0p0, m 0q| D “ 1, M 1p0q “ m1, M 0p0q “ m0s,

“ ErY1p1, M 1p1qq ´ Y1p0, M 1p1qq| D “ 1, M 1 “ m1, M 0 “ m0s

Hence, by the Law of iterated expectations, 

ż

τ DiD pm0, m 1q dF pM1,M 0q| D“1pm1, m 0q“ E“ErY1p1, M 1p1qq ´ Y1p0, M 1p1qq | D “ 1, M 1, M 0s | D “ 1‰

“ ErY1p1, M 1p1qq ´ Y1p0, M 1p1qq | D “ 1s“ ADT T. 

□

A.6. Proof of Proposition 6. 

Proof. We have 

PpY1p0, m 1q ď y|D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q“ Ppg1p0, m 1, U 1q ď y|D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q,

“ PpU1 ď g´11 p0, m 1; yq| D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q under Assumption 10(ii) ,

“ PpU0 ď g´11 p0, m 1; yq| D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q under Assumption 10(i) 

“ Ppg0p0, m 0, U 0q ď g0p0, m 0, g ´11 p0, m 1; yqq| D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q under Assumption 10(ii) ,

“ Ppg0p0, M 0, U 0q ď T pm0, m 1, y q| D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q,

“ PpY0p0, M 0q ď T pm0, m 1, y q| D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q,

“ PpY0 ď T pm0, m 1, y q| D “ d, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q

where T pm0, m 1, y q ” g0p0, m 0, g ´11 p0, m 1; yqq .For d “ 0,FY1|D“0,M 0“m0,M 1“m1 pyq ” PpY1 ď y|D “ 0, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q,

“ PpY1p0, m 1q ď y|D “ 0, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q,

“ FY0|D“0,M 0“m0,M 1“m1 pT pm0, m 1, y qq DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 37 

Therefore, for y P Supp tY1|D “ 0, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1u, we have 

T pm0, m 1, y q “ F ´1 

> Y0|D“0,M 0“m0,M 1“m1

pFY1|D“0,M 0“m0,M 1“m1 pyqq 

under Assumption 10(ii). For d “ 1 and y P Supp tY1|D “ 1, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1u Ď Supp tY1|D “ 0, M 0 “

m0, M 1 “ m1u under Assumption 10(iii), we have 

PpY1p0, m 1q ď y|D “ 1, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q “ 

FY0|D“1,M 0“m0,M 1“m1

´

F ´1 

> Y0|D“0,M 0“m0,M 1“m1

pFY1|D“0,M 0“m0,M 1“m1 pyqq 

¯

.

To complete the proof, it is straightforward that 

PpY1 ď y|D “ 1, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q “ PpY1p1, m 1q ď y|D “ 1, M 0 “ m0, M 1 “ m1q.

□

A.7. Proof of Proposition 7. 

Proof. We have 

Er∆Yit |Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s ´ Er∆Yit |Dit “ 0, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s,

“ Erθit Dit ` βit Mit ´ βi0Mi0 ` ηt ´ η0 ` Uit ´ Ui0|Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s´Erθit Dit ` βit Mit ´ βi0Mi0 ` ηt ´ η0 ` Uit ´ Ui0|Dit “ 0, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s,

“ Erθit |Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s`Erβit mt ´ βi0m0 ` ηt ´ η0 ` Uit ´ Ui0|htpλi, γ i, ε it q “ 1, ψ tp1, γ i, ˜Vit q “ mt, ψ 0p0, γ i, ˜Vi0q “ m0s´Erβit mt ´ βi0m0 ` ηt ´ η0 ` Uit ´ Ui0|htpλi, γ i, ε it q “ 0, ψ tp0, γ i, ˜Vit q “ mt, ψ 0p0, γ i, ˜Vi0q “ m0s,

“ Erθit |Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s`Erβit mt ´ βi0m0 ` ηt ´ η0 ` Uit ´ Ui0s´Erβit mt ´ βi0m0 ` ηt ´ η0 ` Uit ´ Ui0s,

because pUi0, U it , β i0, β it q|ù p ˜Vi0, ˜Vit , λ i, γ i, ε it q under Assumption 11 ,

“ Erθit |Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s.

The overlap condition ensures that the estimand is well-defined. Hence, by integrating this estimand with respect to the distribution of the joint vector pMit , M i0q conditional 38 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

on treated group Dit “ 1, we obtain from the law iterated expectations 

Erθit |Dit “ 1s “

ż

Er∆Yit |Dit “ 1, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0s´Er∆Yit |Dit “ 0, M it “ mt, M i0 “ m0sdF Mit ,M i0|Dit “1pmt, m 0q.

□

Appendix B. Numerical Simulation 

B.1. DGP in Figure 1. Under our model (2.1), we consider the following data generating process. Individual fixed effects and treatment-effect heterogeneity are jointly distributed as 

pλi, γ i, θ i, α iq „ N

¨˚˝¨˚˝

110.61

˛‹‚,

¨˚˝

1 0.5 0.5 00.5 1 0.5 00.5 0.5 1 0.50 0 0.5 1

˛‹‚˛‹‚

It allows the treatment effect on the outcome, θi, to be correlated with fixed effects and the treatment effect on the mediator, αi. Treatment is selected based on fixed effects according to Di “ 1tλi ` γi ą εiu where εi „ N p2, 1q is an exogenous shock, so treatment is endogenous through unobserved heterogeneity. The effects of the mediator on the outcome may vary over time and are allowed to be serially correlated: pβi0, β i1q „ N

ˆˆ 31

˙

,

ˆ 1 0.50.5 1

˙˙ 

.Idiosyncratic disturbances in the outcome and mediator equations are given by 

pUi0, U i1q „ N

ˆˆ 00

˙

,

ˆ 1 0.50.5 1

˙˙ 

, pVi0, V i1q „ N

ˆˆ 00

˙

,

ˆ 1 0.50.5 1

˙˙ 

.Nonrandom time effects are set to pη0, η 1q “ p 0, 1q, pδ0, δ1q “ p 0, 1q.

Appendix C. Additional empirical results 

This Appendix reports a second application, to Alcohol Prohibition in the early twentieth-century United States, and the no-covariate estimates for the railroads ap-plication of Section 6. DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 39 

C.1. Alcohol Prohibition and farm productivity. Howard and Ornaghi (2021) compare counties adopting Alcohol Prohibition during 1900–1910 with counties adopting after 1910. Their DiD estimates show higher farm productivity and land values in early-adopting counties, and they interpret the land-value response as evidence that Prohibition relaxed borrowing constraints and supported capital investment. We retain this treatment comparison but set Yit to log farm productivity and Mit 

to log farm value per acre. The full two-period sample has 2 ,342 counties, with 1,316 treated and 1 ,026 controls; the complete-covariate sample has 2 ,301 counties, with 1 ,296 treated and 1 ,005 controls. Baseline controls consist of the 1890 share-in-favor decile indicators and log population plus the urban, male, white, foreign, and foreign-born shares. Here the direct effect is the productivity component not transmitted through the observed farm-value path, so labor-efficiency and other un-measured channels remain in that component. Table 2 compares the descriptive TWFE decomposition with the improved DR estimator of Sant’Anna and Zhao (2020). The linear DR family uses the original baseline-control span for all three targets and adds pMi0, M i1q only to the direct-effect fit. The additive-quadratic family adds squares of the six continuous controls to all three fits and pM 2

> i0

, M 2

> i1

q to the direct-effect nuisance model, but no Mi0Mi1 in-teraction. Standard errors come from a joint county-clustered CR0 stacked-sandwich covariance without a finite-cluster degrees-of-freedom adjustment. The indirect effect and mediator-effect ratio use the delta method. Average effects. Column (1) of Table 2 gives the descriptive TWFE decomposition on the complete-covariate sample. The total productivity coefficient is 0 .094 p0.038 q,the mediator-adjusted Prohibition coefficient is 0 .065 p0.038 q, and the mediator re-sponse is 0 .057 p0.024 q. These values reproduce the positive land-value channel in the regression decomposition, but Claim 1 rules out assigning causal direct and indirect interpretations without the paper’s identifying restrictions. Under those restrictions, the linear DR fit gives AT T “ 0.133 p0.041 q, ADT T “

0.103 p0.046 q, and a mediator response of 0 .135 p0.028 q. The implied AIT T is 0 .030 

p0.019 q and the mediator-effect ratio is 0 .218 p0.121 q. The ADT T differs from zero 40 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 

Table 2. Total, direct, and indirect treatment effects: Prohibition TWFE Doubly robust Linear path Additive quadratic (1) (2) (3) 

D Ñ Y (Total) 0.094 ˚˚ 0.133 ˚˚˚ 0.115 ˚˚˚ 

(0.038) (0.041) (0.041) 

D Ñ Y (Direct) 0.065 ˚ 0.103 ˚˚ 0.106 ˚˚ 

(0.038) (0.046) (0.047) 

D Ñ M 0.057 ˚˚ 0.135 ˚˚˚ 0.141 ˚˚˚ 

(0.024) (0.028) (0.027) 

M Ñ Y (Ratio) 0.498 ˚˚˚ 0.218 ˚ 0.063 (0.081) (0.121) (0.135) 

D Ñ M Ñ Y (Indirect) 0.028 ˚˚ 0.030 0.009 (0.012) (0.019) (0.020) Baseline controls Original span Original span Original + squares Observations 4,602 4,602 4,602 

Notes : Column (1) is the descriptive TWFE decomposition. Columns (2) and (3) report DR estimates of AT T , ADT T , the treatment effect on M , the mediator-effect ratio, and AIT T under our framework. The outcome is the logarithm of farm productivity, the mediator is the logarithm of farm value per acre, and all columns use the complete-covariate sample. The baseline span contains the 1890 share-in-favor decile indicators and six continuous 1890 controls. Column (3) adds squares of those six controls, and the direct-effect specification also contains M 2 

> i0

and M 2 

> i1

without Mi0Mi1.Standard errors are obtained using a joint county-clustered CR0 stacked-sandwich covariance across 2,301 counties, and the last two rows use the delta method. ˚, ˚˚ , and ˚˚˚ denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% , respectively. 

at the 5% level, the AIT T does not, and the ratio differs from zero only at the 10% level. Adding the quadratic terms changes the ADT T by only 0 .003, to 0 .106 p0.047 q,but reduces the AIT T to 0 .009 p0.020 q and the ratio to 0 .063 p0.135 q. The direct estimate is therefore insensitive to these added terms, whereas evidence for mediation through observed farm value is not. DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 41  

> Table 3.  Total, direct, and indirect treatment effects: Prohibition, with and without baseline controls TWFE  DR: linear path  DR: additive quadratic No controls  Controls  No controls  Controls  No controls  Controls (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)
> D Ñ Y (Total)  0.009  0.094 ˚˚  0.009  0.133 ˚˚˚  0.009  0.115 ˚˚˚
> (0.033)  (0.038)  (0.033)  (0.041)  (0.033)  (0.041)
> D Ñ Y (Direct)  0.079 ˚˚˚  0.065 ˚ 0.080 ˚˚˚  0.103 ˚˚  0.150 ˚˚˚  0.106 ˚˚
> (0.029)  (0.038)  (0.027)  (0.046)  (0.028)  (0.047)
> D Ñ M -0.115 ˚˚˚  0.057 ˚˚  -0.115 ˚˚˚  0.135 ˚˚˚  -0.115 ˚˚˚  0.141 ˚˚˚
> (0.026)  (0.024)  (0.026)  (0.028)  (0.026)  (0.027)
> M Ñ Y (Ratio)  0.601 ˚˚˚  0.498 ˚˚˚  0.616 ˚˚˚  0.218 ˚ 1.222 ˚˚˚  0.063 (0.053)  (0.081)  (0.053)  (0.121)  (0.209)  (0.135)
> D Ñ M Ñ Y (Indirect)  -0.069 ˚˚˚  0.028 ˚˚  -0.071 ˚˚˚  0.030  -0.141 ˚˚˚  0.009 (0.018)  (0.012)  (0.017)  (0.019)  (0.023)  (0.020) Observations  4,684  4,602  4,684  4,602  4,684  4,602
> Notes : Odd-numbered columns omit baseline controls, and even-numbered columns include them. The TWFE columns are descriptive decompositions, and the DR columns report DR estimates of  AT T  , ADT T  , the treatment effect on  M ,the mediator-effect ratio, and  AIT T  under our framework. The linear direct-effect specifications condition on  pMi0, M i1q,and the additive-quadratic models additionally condition on  pM 2
> i0, M  2
> i1q without their interaction.  Standard errors are obtained using a joint county-clustered CR0 stacked-sandwich covariance, with 2 ,342 county clusters in the uncontrolled columns and 2 ,301 in the controlled columns. The last two rows use the delta method. 42 DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS

On the other hand, Table 3 provides the whole picture of the estimates across different specifications along with the use of covariates. Without baseline controls, the TWFE approach gives a total-effect estimate of 0 .009 p0.033 q and a mediator response of ´0.115 p0.026 q. The linear and additive-quadratic DR direct estimates are 0 .080 p0.027 q and 0 .150 p0.028 q, with the indirect effects calculated as ´0.071 

p0.017 q and ´0.141 p0.023 q. With baseline controls, the total and mediator-response estimates are positive, and the indirect estimates are close to zero. C.2. Railroads application without baseline covariates. We repeat the media-tion analysis of the local-adoption analysis with no baseline covariates and summarize the results in Table 4. Note that the total effects and the effects on the mediator are obtained as unadjusted DiD estimands of 0 .520 for the outcome and 0 .756 for the me-diator across all columns. Without the baseline covariates, we obtain ADT T “ 0.547, 

AIT T “ ´ 0.027, and a mediator-effect ratio of ´0.036 with the linear mediator path, and ADT T “ 0.599, AIT T “ ´ 0.079, and a mediator-effect ratio of ´0.105 with the additive quadratic path. In the no-covariate TWFE regression, in contrast, the direct effect estimate is obtained as 0 .086, and the claimed indirect effect estimate is 0 .434. It has to be noted that Claim 1 still limits the TWFE estimates to a descriptive decomposition. DID MODELS IN THE PRESENCE OF TIME-VARYING MEDIATORS 43 

Table 4. Local railroad adoption and market-access mediation, 1870–1890 (no baseline covariates) 

TWFE Doubly Robust Linear path Additive quadratic (1) (2) (3) 

D Ñ Y (Total) 0.520 ˚˚˚ 0.520 ˚˚˚ 0.520 ˚˚˚ 

(0.173) (0.173) (0.173) 

D Ñ Y (Direct) 0.086 0.547 ˚˚˚ 0.599 ˚˚˚ 

(0.190) (0.183) (0.206) 

D Ñ M 0.756 ˚˚˚ 0.756 ˚˚˚ 0.756 ˚˚˚ 

(0.114) (0.114) (0.114) 

M Ñ Y 0.574 ˚˚˚ -0.036 -0.105 (0.163) (0.174) (0.228) 

D Ñ M Ñ Y (Indirect) 0.434 ˚˚˚ -0.027 -0.079 (0.118) (0.130) (0.168) Covariate adjustment None None None Observations 2,110 2,110 2,110 

Notes : Column (1) is the descriptive TWFE decomposition without baseline covariates. Columns (2) and (3) report DR estimates of AT T , ADT T , the treatment effect on M , the mediator-effect ratio, and AIT T under our frame-work. The outcome is the log value of agricultural land and buildings, and the mediator is the log of cost-based market access. The linear direct-effect specifi-cation conditions on pMo0, M o1q, and the additive-quadratic model additionally conditions on pM 2

> o0

, M 2

> o1

q without their interaction. The sample contains 730 adopters and 325 controls observed in two periods. Standard errors use a joint state-clustered CR0 stacked-sandwich covariance across 37 states, and the last two rows use the delta method. ˚, ˚˚ , and ˚˚˚ denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% , respectively.