Title: Hierarchical Group-Conditional Conformal Risk Control for Selective Prediction in Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.24562v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Jul 2026 02:10:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Hierarchical Group-Conditional Conformal Risk Control for Selective Prediction in Language Models 

Murilo Salem mcsalem@inf.ufpel.edu.br 

Daniel Pontes dhspbarretos@inf.ufpel.edu.br 

Luísa Böhm lcbohm@inf.ufpel.edu.br 

Anderson Ferrugem ferrugem@inf.ufpel.edu.br CDTec (Centro de Desenvolvimento Tecnológico) Universidade Federal de Pelotas Pelotas, RS, Brasil 

# Abstract 

Large language models deployed in real-world settings serve heterogeneous populations structured by domain, topic difficulty, and linguistic style. While conformal risk control (CRC) provides rigorous marginal risk guarantees for selective prediction with abstain, marginal guarantees do not imply per-group guarantees: a model can satisfy the population-level risk budget while systematically over-exposing specific subgroups to errors. We demonstrate this failure mode concretely: under mild distributional shift in group composition, standard CRC violates the risk budget in up to 47% of evaluation trials. We propose HG-CRC (Hierarchical Group-Conditional Conformal Risk Control), a post-hoc calibration framework that enforces simultaneous risk guarantees across all nodes of a user-defined group hierarchy. HG-CRC applies a Bonferroni correction over hierarchy nodes and uses a leaf-first selection policy that always applies the most specific applicable threshold, falling back to coarser nodes when a finer node is uncertified or its threshold rejects the example. The method requires only a held-out calibration set and no retraining. We evaluate HG-CRC on three language models (Qwen3-4B, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, Gemma-3-4B) and two multiple-choice benchmarks (ARC Challenge and MMLU-Pro) across eight experimental configurations probing IID generalization, group heterogeneity, mixture shift, domain shift, prompt shift, difficulty shift, label noise, and quantization. Our main result: 

HG-CRC achieves an empirical 0% violation rate and WGER = 0 on ARC Challenge for models with sufficiently high base accuracy (Qwen3-4B and Llama-3.1-8B). At our evaluation resolution of 500 bootstrap trials these zeros are empirical upper bounds—a true violation rate of up to ∼0.6% is consistent with an observed zero—rather than certified zeros. The result is also benchmark-specific: on MMLU-Pro these models either abstain entirely or, for Llama, retain WGER = 0 .014 . For Gemma-3-4B, whose uncertainty scores are poorly calibrated for this task, the method degrades gracefully by abstaining more conservatively. The participation cost relative to global CRC ranges from 22 to 37 percentage points for the two primary pairs under residual calibration, which aligns the calibration and deployment populations of each hierarchy node. Ablation studies show that the hierarchical depth is what clears the risk budget on ARC Challenge: removing the difficulty level returns violations to the 11% level of standard global CRC. The Bonferroni correction is required for the theoretical simultaneous guarantee, though its empirical effect is negligible on ARC’s shallow five-node hierarchy and material only when many nodes are tested. 

# 1 Introduction 

The deployment of large language models (LLMs) in high-stakes settings—medical question answering, educational assessment, legal research—raises fundamental questions about reliability and fairness. A model 1arXiv:2607.24562v1 [cs.AI] 27 Jul 2026 that answers every question achieves high availability but may expose users to an unacceptable rate of confident errors. Selective prediction addresses this tension: the model is allowed to Abstain on uncertain inputs, answering only when it can do so reliably. The practical challenge is to make abstaining principled—calibrated to an explicit error budget rather than tuned by hand. 

Conformal Risk Control. Angelopoulos et al. 2023 showed that a simple thresholding procedure on any uncertainty score can provide a distribution-free marginal risk guarantee: if the score threshold is chosen from a held-out calibration set using the Clopper-Pearson upper bound, then the expected error rate on new test examples is at most α with probability at least 1 − δ. This result is elegant, nonparametric, and broadly applicable. Global CRC has since been applied to medical imaging (see related work), natural language generation (see related work), and code completion (see related work). 

The group coverage gap. Marginal guarantees, however, are not group guarantees. Consider a model calibrated on a dataset with an equal mix of easy and hard questions. The global threshold is chosen to keep the average error rate below α = 0 .10 . Now suppose the test set over-represents hard questions. The 

overall error rate may still be controlled, but the hard-question subgroup bears a disproportionate fraction of the errors—potentially violating the α budget for that group by a wide margin. This is not a hypothetical concern: in our experiments, global CRC violates the per-group risk budget in 47% of bootstrap trials 

under a moderate shift in group composition (Section 5.3). The violation is not a finite-sample artifact; it is a structural consequence of the mismatch between the estimand (marginal risk) and the desideratum (worst-group risk). 

Our approach. We address this gap with HG-CRC , a method that calibrates one threshold per node of a user-specified group hierarchy and applies a Bonferroni correction so that all nodes are simultaneously certified with the desired confidence. The hierarchy captures the natural structure of heterogeneous deployments: at the coarsest level, a global node covers all users; intermediate nodes stratify by domain or topic category; leaf nodes represent the finest granularity, such as domain-by-difficulty cells. At inference time, a leaf-first policy 

routes each example to the deepest certified node in its ancestry path whose threshold the example satisfies, falling back to coarser nodes otherwise. The result is a conservative but principled system: it abstains more often than a global threshold would, but it does so equitably —no group is sacrificed for the benefit of the overall average. 

Summary of contributions. 

1. We formalize the group coverage gap in selective prediction and show that standard CRC fails to control per-group risk under realistic distributional shift (Section 2, 5.3). 2. We propose HG-CRC , a post-hoc calibration procedure that enforces simultaneous risk guarantees across all nodes of a group hierarchy through Bonferroni correction and a leaf-first selection policy (Section 3). 3. We provide a cascade of formal guarantees, each about a well-defined procedure, two of which we run: the data-split variant controls every node’s risk simultaneously with probability 1 − δ unconditionally 

(Proposition 1); the deployed in-sample variant satisfies the same bound up to an additive slack εn

that we prove (Lemma 1) and measure to be below 1% on average (with a worst-case εn ≈ 0.34 on the small ARC pool; Section 8), with an exact intermediate guarantee under test-point augmentation (Proposition 2). 4. We conduct an empirical study across 8 experimental settings, demonstrating that HG-CRC achieves WGER = 0 and a 0% empirical violation rate (an empirical upper bound of ∼0.6% at 500 trials) for the primary ARC model–dataset pairs, with a modest participation cost (Section 5). 5. We show that the method degrades gracefully under label noise, remains robust under model quantization, and that its guarantees can be restored after prompt distribution shift via targeted recalibration. 22 Background and Related Work 

2.1 Selective Prediction and Abstain 

Selective prediction (Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2017; El-Yaniv & Wiener, 2010) is the task of producing a prediction system (f, g ) where f : X → Y is a classifier and g : X → { 0, 1} is a selector that decides whether to answer (g(x) = 1 ) or abstain ( g(x) = 0 ). The coverage (also called participation ) of the system is ϕ = P(g(x) = 1) ,and the selective risk is R = E[ℓ(f (x), y ) | g(x) = 1] , where ℓ is a loss function. The fundamental trade-off is that more selective systems (lower ϕ) can achieve lower risk, but they answer fewer queries. In practice, selectors are typically implemented by thresholding an uncertainty score s : X → R: the system answers if s(x) ≤ τ and abstains otherwise. A lower score indicates higher confidence. The question of how to choose τ to satisfy a risk constraint while maximizing participation is the central calibration problem. 

2.2 Conformal Risk Control 

Angelopoulos et al. (2023) showed that τ can be chosen from a held-out calibration set {(xi, y i)}ni=1 so that the selective risk on future exchangeable test points satisfies P(R ≤ α) ≥ 1 − δ. The key ingredient is the Clopper-Pearson (CP) upper confidence bound: given k errors among n calibration examples that answered, the CP bound UCP (k, n, δ ) is the 1 − δ quantile of Beta (k + 1 , n − k), which controls the one-sided error. The threshold τ ∗ is chosen as the largest value in a finite grid {τ1, . . . , τ T } such that the CP-bound on the error rate of the resulting selector is at most α. This is a nonparametric, model-agnostic procedure that requires no assumptions about the underlying distribution beyond exchangeability. 

Limitations of marginal CRC. The marginal guarantee is exactly that: marginal. It controls P(E[ℓ |

g(x) = 1] > α ) ≤ δ, but it says nothing about the risk within any particular subgroup G ⊆ X . If the calibration set is not representative of the group structure in the test set, the threshold chosen by global CRC may be systematically miscalibrated for some groups. In the worst case, global CRC can achieve zero excess risk in the majority group while violating the budget entirely in a minority group, with no mechanism to detect or correct this. 

2.3 Group-Conditional Guarantees and Fairness 

The need for per-group coverage has been extensively studied in the context of conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2009; Boström et al., 2021; Romano et al., 2020b). Mondrian conformal prediction produces prediction sets with conditional coverage for each group by running a separate conformal procedure per group. This is equivalent to what we call flat groupwise CRC : compute one threshold per group using group-specific calibration data. While this controls per-group risk in isolation, it suffers from two problems. First, it treats groups independently and does not exploit the hierarchical structure of natural group taxonomies. Second, and more critically for our setting, it does not provide a simultaneous guarantee across all groups: running 

K independent tests each at level δ yields a family-wise error rate (FWER) of approximately Kδ under independence, not δ.The need for simultaneous inference motivates a Bonferroni-style correction, which we incorporate into 

HG-CRC . Recent work on fairness in conformal prediction (Barber et al., 2021; Romano et al., 2020a) has studied related problems, but typically in the context of classification prediction sets rather than selective prediction with abstain. Our work is the first, to our knowledge, to study group-conditional risk control for selective prediction in LLMs with a hierarchical group structure. 

2.4 Uncertainty Quantification in LLMs 

Several uncertainty scores have been proposed for LLMs. Token-level entropy (Malinin & Gales, 2021), sequence-level NLL, and self-consistency scores (Wang et al., 2023) all proxy model confidence. For multiple-choice tasks, the negative log-likelihood of the model’s selected option (which we call the selected-option NLL ) is a natural score that correlates well with accuracy and is fast to compute without additional inference 3passes. We study the sensitivity of HG-CRC to the choice of uncertainty score in Section 6.3 and find that most score choices yield equivalent performance. 

# 3 Method: Hierarchical Group-Conditional CRC 

3.1 Setup and Notation 

Let X be an input space and Y a label space. We assume access to a pre-trained language model that produces, for each input x, a probability distribution over Y from which we extract an uncertainty score 

s(x) ∈ R (lower = more confident). We have a labeled calibration set Dcal = {(xi, y i)}ni=1 drawn i.i.d. from a data distribution P, and an unlabeled test stream. Each example is additionally associated with group membership indicators derived from metadata (e.g., domain label) or from the model’s own behavior (e.g., estimated difficulty). 

Definition 1 (Hierarchy) . A group hierarchy H is a rooted tree where each node v is associated with a binary mask mv : X → { 0, 1} indicating group membership. The root node has mroot (x) = 1 for all x. For any non-root node v with parent p(v), membership is nested: mv (x) = 1 ⇒ mp(v)(x) = 1 . For any example x,the ancestry path Π( x) is the sequence of nodes from the deepest node v with mv (x) = 1 to the root, ordered from leaf to root. 

Definition 2 (Selective Predictor) . Given a threshold assignment {τv }v∈H , the HG-CRC selective predictor is: 

ˆy(x) = 

{

f (x) if v∗(x) exists 

Abstain otherwise , v∗(x) = arg max 

> v∈Π( x)

{ depth (v) : v certified , s (x) ≤ τv

}, (1) 

where v∗(x) is the deepest certified ancestor of x whose threshold the example satisfies ( s(x) ≤ τv∗ ), and 

Abstain is returned if no such node exists. 

3.2 Per-Node Calibration with Bonferroni Correction 

Let |H| denote the number of nodes in the hierarchy. We wish to choose thresholds {τv }v∈H such that, with probability at least 1 − δ over the calibration set, the selective risk satisfies Rv ≤ α for every node v

simultaneously. Direct application of the union bound gives the required per-node confidence level: 

ˆδ = δ

|H| . (2) For each node v, let Dv = {i : mv (xi) = 1 } be the subset of calibration examples belonging to node v, with 

nv = |D v |. Let kv (τ ) be the number of errors in Dv when threshold τ is used: kv (τ ) = ∑ 

> i∈D v

ℓ(f (xi), y i) ·

1[s(xi) ≤ τ ]. The Clopper-Pearson upper bound at level ˆδ is: 

Uv (τ ) = CP 

(

kv (τ ), n v (τ ), ˆδ

)

= F −1

> Beta

(

1 − ˆδ; kv (τ ) + 1 , n v (τ ) − kv (τ )

)

, (3) where nv (τ ) = |{ i ∈ D v : s(xi) ≤ τ }| is the number of examples that would answer under threshold τ . Node 

v is certified at threshold τ if Uv (τ ) ≤ α. The optimal threshold for node v is: 

τ ∗ 

> v

= max {τ ∈ T : Uv (τ ) ≤ α}, (4) where T is a finite grid of candidate thresholds (100 quantiles of the calibration score distribution). If no 

τ ∈ T satisfies the constraint, node v is left uncertified. 

Minimum group size. Nodes with very few calibration examples cannot be certified: even with zero errors, the CP bound at small n exceeds α. We therefore include a node in the hierarchy only if |D v | ≥ Nmin (we use 

Nmin = 30 in all experiments). Nodes below this threshold are pruned from H, reducing |H| and accordingly tightening the per-node budget ˆδ.43.3 Residual Calibration 

The leaf-first selective predictor (Definition 2) routes each test example to its deepest certified ancestor . A node v is therefore deployed only on its residual : examples in group v that are not answered by any certified descendant of v. Writing desc (v) for the certified descendants of v and gτ (x) = 1[s(x) ≤ τ ] for the answer indicator at threshold τ , the residual membership map is 

ρv (x) = mv (x) ∏

> c∈desc( v)

(1 − mc(x) gτc (x)), (5) i.e. ρv (x) = 1 iff x belongs to v and is not answered by any certified descendant. A node calibrated on its full group Dv but deployed on {x : ρv (x) = 1 } suffers a population mismatch: if descendants preferentially answer easy examples (lower score), the residual is harder on average and the calibrated threshold no longer controls the deployed risk. We therefore calibrate each node on its residual. The two constructions below differ only in how the descendant thresholds {τc} that define ρv are estimated — and this difference is exactly what determines whether the calibration guarantee holds. 

In-sample residual calibration (deployed default). Process nodes leaf-to-root on the full calibration set. After certifying a descendant c at threshold τc, mark the calibration examples it answers ( mc = 1 and gτc = 1 )as claimed ; node v is then calibrated on Dres  

> v

= {i ∈ D v : i unclaimed }. This keeps the maximum amount of data at every node, hence the highest participation, but the residual partition of Dres  

> v

depends on thresholds 

τc estimated from the same examples, which is the exchangeability obstruction analyzed in Proposition 2. 

Split residual calibration (formally valid). Partition Dcal = ⊎L−1 

> ℓ=0

Fℓ into L disjoint folds indexed by depth ( L = number of distinct depths). A node at depth ℓ is calibrated only on Fℓ, and the thresholds τc

that define its residual ρv are taken from strictly deeper nodes, which were calibrated on the disjoint folds 

Fℓ′ , ℓ ′ > ℓ . The residual partition of Fℓ is then a function of data independent of Fℓ, restoring exchangeability (Proposition 1). The cost is statistical: each level sees only ≈ |D cal |/L examples. 

3.4 Leaf-First Selection Policy 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the full procedure. At test time, each example x walks its ancestry path Π( x) from leaf to root, returning the threshold of the first certified node encountered. If no certified node exists in Π( x),the example is abstained. The leaf-first ordering is critical. Reversing the order—trying the global threshold first—would route most examples through the global node, defeating the purpose of the hierarchy. By trying the most specific node first, we ensure that examples in well-characterized subgroups benefit from the most tailored threshold available. 

3.5 Formal Guarantee 

We state the guarantee first for the split variant, the procedure whose assumptions are met exactly : calibration and deployment populations coincide, and the residual partition is independent of the data used to calibrate each node. 

Proposition 1 (Simultaneous group risk control, split calibration) . Let Dcal = {(xi, y i)}ni=1 be i.i.d. from 

P and let (x, y ) ∼ P be an independent test point. Run Algorithm 1 in split mode with ˆδ = δ/ |H| and a threshold grid T that is either fixed a priori or a permutation-invariant function of the node’s calibration fold 

Fℓ (e.g. its empirical score quantiles). Then for each node v ∈ H ,

P(Rv (τ ∗ 

> v

) > α | ρv (x) = 1) ≤ ˆδ, Rv (τ ) = E[ℓ(f (x), y ) | gτ (x) = 1 , ρ v (x) = 1] , (6) 

where Rv is the risk on the node’s deployed residual (5) . By the union bound, P(∃v ∈ H : Rv (τ ∗ 

> v

) > α ) ≤|H| · ˆδ = δ.Proof. Fix a node v at depth ℓ and condition on the strictly deeper calibration folds {Fℓ′ }ℓ′>ℓ . The descendant thresholds {τc}c∈desc( v) are functions of these deeper folds only, hence so is the residual map ρv

5Algorithm 1 HG-CRC : Hierarchical Group-Conditional CRC (residual calibration) 

Require: Calibration set Dcal , hierarchy H, score s, classifier f , risk level α, confidence δ, minimum size 

Nmin , mode ∈ { in-sample , split } 

> 1:

ˆδ ← δ/ |H| ▷ Bonferroni correction  

> 2:

if mode = split then  

> 3:

assign each i ∈ D cal a depth-fold ℓi ▷ F ℓ = {i : ℓi = ℓ} 

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

for each node v ∈ H in leaf-to-root (decreasing depth) order do  

> 6:

Cv ← { i : mv (xi) = 1 , ρ v (xi) = 1 , |Cv | ≥ Nmin } ▷ residual (5): drop examples claimed by certified deeper nodes  

> 7:

if mode = split then  

> 8:

Cv ← Cv ∩ Fdepth (v) 

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

τ ∗ 

> v

← max {τ ∈ T : Uv (τ ) ≤ α} on Cv , or uncertified  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

function Predict (x) 

> 13:

for v ∈ Π( x) do ▷ leaf to root  

> 14:

if v is certified and s(x) ≤ τ ∗ 

> v

then return f (x) 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end forreturn Abstain  

> 17:

end function 

in (5) ; conditionally, ρv is a fixed measurable function. The node is calibrated on Cv = {i ∈ Fℓ : mv (xi) = 1, ρ v (xi) = 1 }. Since Fℓ is disjoint from the deeper folds, its points are i.i.d. from P and independent of 

ρv , as is the test point (x, y ). Hence, given ρv (·) = 1 , the calibration scores in Cv and the test score are exchangeable, and the Clopper–Pearson upper bound Uv certifies τ ∗ 

> v

at level ˆδ exactly as in single-node CRC (Angelopoulos et al., 2023), giving P(Rv (τ ∗ 

> v

) > α | ρv (x) = 1) ≤ ˆδ. If the grid is fixed a priori it is trivially independent of the data; for the empirical quantile grid, note that T is a symmetric function of the calibration fold Fℓ. Since ρv depends only on the strictly deeper folds, which are disjoint from Fℓ, it remains the fixed function established above when we condition additionally on the unordered multiset of Fℓ; under this joint conditioning T becomes a measurable constant while the exchangeability between the test point and the members of the residual cell is preserved, and refining the grid can only tighten the selected threshold. Together with the monotone “certify and take the largest τ ” rule, the bound is therefore invariant to the choice between an a-priori grid and the empirical quantile grid. Marginalizing over the deeper folds preserves the bound, and the Bonferroni union bound over the |H| nodes yields the simultaneous statement. The in-sample default deploys the same residual procedure but estimates the descendant thresholds {τc} on the data it also calibrates on. We isolate the exact condition under which it remains valid. 

Proposition 2 (Conditional validity, in-sample calibration) . Run Algorithm 1 in in-sample mode. Suppose each descendant threshold τc is computed by a permutation-invariant estimator of its residual calibration multiset and is recomputed on the augmented multiset that also includes the test point (full-/cross-conformal augmentation). Then, conditional on {τc}c∈desc( v), the residual calibration points and the test point are exchangeable, and P(Rv (τ ∗ 

> v

) > α | ρv (x) = 1) ≤ ˆδ; the simultaneous bound follows as in Proposition 1. Proof. Write Zi = ( xi, y i) for the calibration points and Zn+1 = ( x, y ) for the test point; the Z1, . . . , Z n+1 

are i.i.d. and hence exchangeable. In the augmented procedure each descendant threshold τc is a permutation-invariant function of the multiset {{ Z1, . . . , Z n+1 }} (it is computed by a symmetric estimator on Dcal ∪{ Zn+1 }). Condition on the unordered multiset M = {{ Z1, . . . , Z n+1 }} . Given M, the ordered tuple is uniform over the 

(n+1)! permutations of M by exchangeability, while every τc — a function of M alone — is constant under this conditioning. Hence the residual map ρv in (5) is a fixed function and the residual cell S = {z ∈ M : ρv (z) = 1 }

is a fixed sub-multiset. By the uniform-over-permutations property the test point occupies a uniformly random position among the members of S, so the test score is exchangeable with the residual calibration 6scores. The Clopper–Pearson upper bound on the residual is therefore a valid level-ˆδ bound for the residual risk, giving P(Rv (τ ∗ 

> v

) > α | ρv (x) = 1) ≤ ˆδ exactly as in single-node CRC (Angelopoulos et al., 2023); the simultaneous statement follows by the Bonferroni union bound as in Proposition 1. The augmentation is exactly what the deployed in-sample procedure does not do: Algorithm 1 ( in-sample 

mode) freezes each τc on Dcal and applies it to a test point that never entered the computation, so conditioning on τc treats calibration and test points asymmetrically and exchangeability can fail. We give the deployed procedure its own guarantee. 

Assumption 1 (Threshold regularity) . At all certified nodes outside a boundary set of probability O(εn),the Clopper–Pearson curve Uc(·) crosses the level α transversally at the selected grid threshold τc with a margin γ ≫ 1/n c: Uc at the grid points adjacent to τc stays at least γ away from α. Equivalently, outside that boundary set the score distribution has no atom at the relevant quantile and has positive density in a neighbourhood of it. 

This is the only place we step outside the distribution-free regime; it is mild for the continuous NLL-style scores we use. Its role is precise: a one-point change in Dcal shifts each count kc, n c by at most one and hence moves Uc by O(1 /n c) at every grid point, so under Assumption 1 (margin γ ≫ 1/n c) the selected grid threshold is unchanged. Without the margin the selection can jump one grid step — a discrete move whose size is set by the grid resolution, not by 1/n — which is why we do not claim a clean O(1 /n ) rate and instead measure the effect. 

Lemma 1 (Validity of plain in-sample calibration) . Run Algorithm 1 in in-sample mode (no augmentation), the procedure deployed in all experiments. Let ̂a (x) be its answer decision for a test point x and ̂a +(x) the decision of the augmented procedure of Proposition 2, and set εn = P(̂a(x)̸ =̂a +(x)) . Then 

P(Rv (τ ∗ 

> v

) > α | ρv (x) = 1 ) ≤ ˆδ + εn, P(∃v : Rv > α ) ≤ δ + |H| εn.

Under Assumption 1, εn vanishes outside the event that some threshold on x’s ancestry path sits within one grid step of the α boundary; it is thus governed by the grid resolution and the frequency of boundary thresholds, not by a fixed rate in n.Proof. Couple the deployed and augmented procedures on the same data. The augmented procedure is exactly valid by Proposition 2. For every test point with ̂a (x) = ̂a +(x) the two induce the identical routing, answer, and hence risk event; they can disagree only on {̂a (x)̸ =̂a +(x)}, of probability εn. To make the perturbation explicit, write πv = P(gτ (x) = 1 , ρ v (x) = 1) for the residual-cell answer probability; since the disagreement set has probability at most εn and enters both the numerator and the conditioning event of 

Rv = E[ℓ | gτ (x) = 1 , ρ v (x) = 1] , the conditional risks differ by |Rdeployed  

> v

− Raug  

> v

| ≤ εn/π v . Equivalently, the deployed risk event is contained in the augmented risk event together with the disagreement set, whose conditional contribution is at most εn; this gives the per-node bound, and the Bonferroni union over |H| 

nodes gives the simultaneous bound. A decision flips only if some threshold on x’s path changes between the 

Dcal and the augmented computation — a descendant τc (altering x’s residual membership ρv ) or the node threshold τ ∗ 

> v

itself. Each is the largest grid point with U (·) ≤ α; adding one point moves every U by O(1 /n ),so under Assumption 1 the selected grid point, and the decision, are unchanged. The residual contribution is the margin event in which a threshold lies within O(1 /n ) of α and one point moves it a grid step. We estimate εn by jackknife (leave-one-out over calibration points, the sample analogue of the augmentation perturbation). Across our three models on arc-challenge (α = 0 .1) and mmlu-pro (α = 0 .3), a one-point perturbation changes the selected threshold in fewer than 6% of cases and flips a test decision with mean probability below 0.5% (95 th percentile below 1% ), shrinking with calibration size (mean of order 10 −4

at n ≈ 2.4k); the rare large flips are exactly the predicted grid-step jumps at boundary thresholds. The conditional slack the lemma adds to ˆδ is εn/π v : negligible at nodes whose residual cell carries non-negligible mass, and correspondingly weaker at sparse nodes (small πv , such as Gemma’s leaf cells), consistent with the low participation there. It is therefore empirically negligible for the deployed procedure at the nodes that actually answer, while Proposition 1 (split) attains the same guarantee with εn = 0 unconditionally, at the participation cost of Remark 2. 7Remark 1 (A cascade of guarantees) . The three results bracket precisely the three procedures in this paper, from strongest guarantee to most data-efficient: Proposition 1 ( split ) is unconditional but calibrates each level on a disjoint fold; Proposition 2 (in-sample with test-point augmentation) is exact but recomputes thresholds per test point; and Lemma 1 (plain in-sample) covers the deployed procedure of every experiment, exact up to the measured slack εn. Two of the three subjects—split and plain in-sample—are procedures we run; the augmented procedure is the exact bridge between them. 

Corollary 2.1 (Zero WGER) . Let the Worst-Group Excess Risk be WGER = max v∈H max (Rv − α, 0) .Under the event of Proposition 1 (split) or Proposition 2 (augmented in-sample), which occurs with probability 

1 − δ — or of Lemma 1 (plain in-sample), with probability 1 − δ − |H| εn — WGER = 0 .

Remark 2 (The price of formal validity) . Proposition 1 holds for the split variant unconditionally; Proposition 2 makes the in-sample variant exact under test-point augmentation; and Lemma 1 covers the plain in-sample default up to the measured slack εn. The two variants thus trade formal validity against statistical efficiency: splitting calibrates each level on ≈ |D cal |/L examples and so answers fewer. We quantify this gap over 200 paired calibration/test resamples ( δ = 0 .05 ); within each resample both variants are calibrated on the same data, so the participation cost is a within-resample paired difference, which is why its confidence intervals are tight. On arc-challenge at the paper’s canonical α = 0 .1 (a global → difficulty hierarchy; the same three models as Section 5.2), splitting costs between 0.6 pp ( [−2.1, 3.3] , indistinguishable from zero) and 

5.5 pp ( [3 .7, 7.4] ) of participation depending on the model, while both variants keep every node’s empirical violation rate below δ. We do not detect a safety penalty for the in-sample default: a paired McNemar test on the node-violation indicators shows no significant difference after Holm correction across the three models (smallest adjusted p = 0 .09 ), and the sign of the difference is not even consistent across models. The honest reading is therefore not that the variants are equivalent — 200 resamples cannot establish that — but that in the regimes we can measure, the in-sample default carries no detectable safety cost, while splitting buys the 

unconditional guarantee of Proposition 1 for a few points of participation. A controlled synthetic study (heterogeneous groups, descendants answering the easy examples) maps how this cost varies: it is near-zero when scores separate well and the hierarchy is shallow ( 0.9 pp at depth 2) and grows with depth and weaker separation (up to ∼ 14 pp at depth 3), with both variants holding δ throughout. The real and synthetic numbers agree in order of magnitude in this cheap corner (shallow hierarchy, well-separated scores), which is what licenses reading the synthetic study as a map of the expensive regimes we cannot reach empirically. As a second, deliberately harder data point, on mmlu-pro these 4B-class models are too weak for α = 0 .1 to admit any non-trivial answering — a non-deployability regime in its own right — so only by relaxing to α = 0 .3 can we measure the trade-off there ( 2.2–4.9 pp, again with no detected safety difference, McNemar p ≥ 0.45 ); this corroborates the result rather than anchoring it. We deploy the in-sample variant by default for its higher participation — it is covered by the stability lemma (Lemma 1), whose slack εn we measure to be below 1% , and as shown above it incurs no detectable safety cost — and provide the split variant as the unconditionally-guaranteed alternative (Proposition 1) whose price is the few points of participation measured above. 

Remark 3. The Bonferroni correction is conservative: it bounds the FWER from above. For |H| nodes, the per-node budget ˆδ = δ/ |H| may be unnecessarily small when nodes are positively correlated (which they are, since higher nodes contain all examples of lower nodes). More powerful procedures such as Holm-Bonferroni or hierarchical testing (Yekutieli, 2008) could reduce the conservatism, but we use Bonferroni for its simplicity and transparency. We investigate the effect of removing the correction in Section 6.2. 

# 4 Experimental Setup 

4.1 Models and Datasets 

We evaluate on three publicly available instruction-tuned language models at the 4–8B parameter scale: 

Qwen3-4B (Team, 2025b), a dense model with strong reasoning capabilities; Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024), a widely-used open-source baseline; and Gemma-3-4B-IT (Team, 2025a), a smaller model with competitive accuracy. All models are evaluated in bf16 precision unless otherwise noted. 8We use two multiple-choice benchmarks. ARC Challenge (Clark et al., 2018) consists of 1,172 science questions drawn from standardized tests, each with four answer choices. The allenai/ai2_arc distribution we load exposes no per-question subject or difficulty field, so we treat ARC as a single science domain. Consequently the domain level of the hierarchy is trivial for ARC, and the meaningful sub-grouping is by difficulty (defined below). MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024) is a harder variant of MMLU with ten answer choices per question, covering 57 academic subjects. For each model-dataset pair, we pool all available examples and split them 50/50 into calibration and test sets for bootstrap evaluation. 

4.2 Uncertainty Score and Threshold Grid 

Our primary uncertainty score is the selected-option NLL . For a multiple-choice question with K options, let ℓk be the model’s logit for option k and p′ 

> k

= exp( ℓk)/ ∑Kj=1 exp( ℓj ) the probability normalized over the option set. The model selects ˆk = arg max k p′

> k

, and we score the question by the negative log-probability of that selected option: 

s(x) = − log p′ 

> ˆk

= − max  

> k

log p′

> k

. (7) Intuitively, this score is low when the model concentrates probability mass on a single option (confident) and high when the selected option’s normalized probability is small, i.e. mass is spread diffusely across options (uncertain). Because the selected option is the arg max , in this multiple-choice setting s(x) coincides exactly with the min-log-prob and sequence-NLL scores, which is why those rows are identical in Table 6. We study alternative scores in Section 6.3. The threshold grid T consists of 100 evenly-spaced quantiles of the NLL scores in the calibration set. We set 

α = 0 .10 (acceptable error rate) and δ = 0 .05 (confidence) in all experiments. 

4.3 Group Hierarchy 

We construct a two-level hierarchy above the global root: 

Domain nodes (level 2). We use the dataset’s provided domain metadata to partition examples into domain groups. MMLU-Pro has 57 subjects grouped into broader categories. ARC, as loaded, carries no subject metadata and collapses to a single science domain, so for ARC this level is degenerate and the hierarchy reduces to global → difficulty. A domain node is included in the hierarchy only if it contains at least Nmin = 30 calibration examples. 

Difficulty nodes (level 3). Within each domain, we further partition examples into three difficulty bins (easy, medium, hard) based on NLL score percentiles: the k-th calibration example is assigned to hard if its NLL exceeds the 67th percentile, easy if it falls below the 33rd percentile, and medium otherwise. Difficulty bins with fewer than Nmin examples are pruned. 

Note on endogeneity. Because difficulty bins are derived from NLL percentiles—the same score used for thresholding—the “hard” bin by construction contains high-NLL examples, creating an alignment between group membership and calibrated threshold values. A cleaner grouping would use an exogenous difficulty notion independent of the deployed NLL score. The allenai/ai2_arc distribution we load does not expose human difficulty labels, so we construct an exogenous signal from a reference model’s score (independent of the deployed threshold) and re-run the mixture-shift experiment under it in Section 5.3; the failure of global CRC persists, confirming the effect is structural rather than an artifact of the endogenous bins. The full hierarchy thus has at most 1 + |domains | + |domains | × 3 nodes, with pruning typically reducing this to 5–15 nodes depending on the dataset. 

4.4 Baselines 

We compare against four baselines: B0 (Always Answer) : the model answers every question; no threshold is applied. This achieves maximum participation but no risk control. B1 (Fixed Threshold) : a threshold is set at the 50th percentile of calibration scores without any statistical guarantee. B4 (Global CRC) :the standard CRC procedure applied once over the full calibration set, providing a marginal guarantee. B5 

9Table 1: IID results on ARC Challenge. α=0.10 , δ=0.05 . Violation rate ≤ 0.05 satisfies the CRC guarantee. Best method per model shown in bold . Identical rows are shaded identically. Model Method Risk Participation WGER Viol. rate Qwen3-4B B0 — Always answer 0.126 ±0.013 1.000 0.026 0.980 

B1 — Fixed threshold 0.087 ±0.012 0.899 0.001 0.142 

B4 — Global CRC 0.070 ±0.021 0.849 0.001 0.110 

B5 — Groupwise CRC 0.070 ±0.021 0.849 0.001 0.110 

Gemma-3-4B B0 — Always answer 0.223 ±0.016 1.000 0.123 1.000 

B1 — Fixed threshold 0.188 ±0.016 0.896 0.088 1.000 

B4 — Global CRC 0.054 ±0.040 0.294 0.001 0.094 

B5 — Groupwise CRC 0.054 ±0.040 0.294 0.001 0.094 

Llama-3.1-8B B0 — Always answer 0.176 ±0.015 1.000 0.076 1.000 

B1 — Fixed threshold 0.136 ±0.014 0.897 0.036 0.998 

B4 — Global CRC 0.067 ±0.023 0.695 0.001 0.090 

B5 — Groupwise CRC 0.067 ±0.023 0.695 0.001 0.090 

(Flat Groupwise CRC) : independent CRC applied to each domain group separately, without hierarchical structure and without Bonferroni correction across groups. 

4.5 Evaluation Protocol 

We use bootstrap resampling with 500 trials to estimate variance. In each trial, the calibration and test sets are independently resampled by random permutation of the full data pool (50% / 50% split). We report: (i) risk mean ± std , the mean and standard deviation of the empirical error rate across bootstrap trials; (ii) participation mean , the mean fraction of test examples that receive a prediction; (iii) WGER , the worst-group excess risk; and (iv) violation rate , the fraction of bootstrap trials in which the empirical risk exceeds α = 0 .10 . A method with violation rate ≤ δ = 0 .05 satisfies the CRC guarantee empirically. Five hundred bootstrap trials provide good statistical resolution: by the rule of three, a true violation rate of up to 3/500 ≈ 0.6% is compatible with an observed rate of zero at conventional confidence. Reported “0% violation rates” should therefore be interpreted as empirical upper bounds of approximately 0.6%, not as certified zeros. (An earlier version of this evaluation used 50 trials, for which the corresponding upper bound was ≈6%; we re-ran all bootstrap experiments at 500 trials, and report only those numbers here.) 

# 5 Main Results 

5.1 IID Sanity Check (E1) 

We first verify that global CRC satisfies its marginal guarantee in the IID setting. Table 1 reports results for all models on ARC Challenge. Several patterns emerge. First, global CRC (B4) successfully controls the marginal risk for all three models: mean risk is 0.054–0.070, well below α = 0 .10 . The violation rate for Qwen is 0.11, which exceeds δ = 0 .05 

nominally; this persists at 500 bootstrap trials, so it is not a low-resolution artifact but a genuine finite-

calibration -sample effect: with only ∼586 calibration examples the Clopper–Pearson bound is loose, and about 11% of resamples fall slightly above the nominal level. This is expected behavior for CRC with small calibration sets, and it is a caveat on the baseline that propagates into all downstream comparisons. Second, and perhaps most surprisingly, global CRC and flat groupwise CRC are identical across all models. The rows for B4 and B5 are numerically indistinguishable. This is not a coincidence: in the IID setting, where the joint distribution of examples and group memberships is the same in calibration and test, the global threshold is already calibrated for every group. The flat groupwise procedure applies independent 10 Table 2: Group heterogeneity results on ARC Challenge. HG-CRC is shown in bold. ARC has a single domain, so the deployed hierarchy is global → difficulty (the domain node coincides with the global node). Model Method Risk Participation WGER Viol. rate Qwen3-4B B0 — Always answer 0.126 ±0.013 1.000 0.026 0.980 

B1 — Fixed threshold 0.087 ±0.012 0.899 0.001 0.142 

B4 — Global CRC 0.070 ±0.021 0.849 0.001 0.110 

B5 — Groupwise CRC 0.070 ±0.021 0.849 0.001 0.110 

HG-CRC (ours) 0.018 ±0.013 0.478 0.000 0.000 

Gemma-3-4B B0 — Always answer 0.223 ±0.016 1.000 0.123 1.000 

B1 — Fixed threshold 0.188 ±0.016 0.896 0.088 1.000 

B4 — Global CRC 0.054 ±0.040 0.294 0.001 0.094 

B5 — Groupwise CRC 0.054 ±0.040 0.294 0.001 0.094 

HG-CRC (ours) 0.025 ±0.040 0.084 0.000 0.030 

Llama-3.1-8B B0 — Always answer 0.176 ±0.015 1.000 0.076 1.000 

B1 — Fixed threshold 0.136 ±0.014 0.897 0.036 0.998 

B4 — Global CRC 0.067 ±0.023 0.695 0.001 0.090 

B5 — Groupwise CRC 0.067 ±0.023 0.695 0.001 0.090 

HG-CRC (ours) 0.020 ±0.012 0.475 0.000 0.000 

CRC to each group and thereby loses statistical power (smaller nv per group, higher variance), ending up at the same threshold. This finding has an important implication: flat groupwise CRC does not add value in the IID case, and it provides no additional guarantees because it does not apply a simultaneous correction. Its advantage over global CRC should only emerge in settings with group heterogeneity or distributional shift—which is precisely what HG-CRC is designed to address. Third, we note that Gemma-3-4B has a substantially lower participation rate than the other two models (29.4% vs. 84.9% for Qwen and 69.5% for Llama). This is a structural property of the model on this dataset: Gemma assigns probability mass more diffusely over options, yielding high NLL scores even on questions it answers correctly. As a result, the CRC threshold is set conservatively, and many examples are abstained. This will remain a recurring observation throughout our experiments. 

5.2 Group Heterogeneity: Main Results (E2) 

Having established the IID baseline, we now evaluate HG-CRC in the setting for which it was designed: a dataset with genuine group heterogeneity. On ARC Challenge, which carries a single domain, this heterogeneity is across difficulty levels (the general multi-domain case is exercised on MMLU-Pro). Table 2 reports the full comparison. A careful reader will notice that the Global CRC and Flat Groupwise CRC rows in Table 2 are numerically identical to the corresponding rows in Table 1. This is expected: both experiments draw from the same data pool with a random 50/50 split, so the IID partition introduces no systematic group imbalance. The 11% violation rate of Global CRC in E2 reflects the same finite-sample behavior documented in E1—not a group heterogeneity effect. What Table 2 isolates is instead the simultaneous guarantee. Global CRC satisfies its marginal guarantee most of the time, but provides no certificate that every group simultaneously meets the budget in the same trial. HG-CRC provides exactly that simultaneous certificate. Its participation cost relative to global CRC—quantified below as a 22.0–37.1 pp reduction for the two primary pairs—comes mainly from the leaf-first residual calibration rather than the Bonferroni correction: the A4 ablation (Table 5) attributes ≈10 .6 pp to the correction ( 0.584 → 0.478 ), with the residual calibration accounting for the remainder ( 0.849 → 0.584 ). The genuine failure mode of marginal guarantees—where group heterogeneity 11 causes a single threshold to systematically over-serve one group at the expense of another—is demonstrated under controlled mixture shift in Section 5.3. 

HG-CRC eliminates violations. For both Qwen3-4B and Llama-3.1-8B, HG-CRC achieves a violation rate of exactly 0.000 across all 500 bootstrap trials. This is in stark contrast to global CRC, which violates in 9–11% of trials on the same data. For Gemma-3-4B, the violation rate drops from 0.094 to 0.030—also below the target δ = 0 .05 .

HG-CRC achieves WGER = 0. For Qwen and Llama, the worst-group excess risk is identically zero, meaning that in every bootstrap trial, every certified group meets the α = 0 .10 budget. This is the practical meaning of simultaneous group certification: no group is sacrificed for the average. Gemma achieves WGER = 0.000 as well, with the caveat that its participation is so low (0.084) that the worst-group statistic is computed over very few answered examples. 

Participation cost is modest. The leaf-first policy is conservative: it applies the tightest threshold available, which necessarily abstains more than the global threshold. For Qwen, participation decreases from 0.849 to 0.478—a reduction of 37.1 percentage points. For Llama, it decreases from 0.695 to 0.475—a reduction of 22.0 percentage points. These costs are the price of group-conditional guarantees under residual calibration: each node is calibrated on the subpopulation it actually sees at deployment, which for parent nodes excludes examples already answered by certified descendants. This subpopulation tends to be harder on average, requiring more conservative thresholds. If all groups were identical, the hierarchical threshold would coincide with the global threshold and the cost would be zero. 

Risk is lower under HG-CRC. Because HG-CRC abstains more aggressively on hard subgroups, the examples it does answer tend to be easier and lower-risk. Mean risk drops from 0.070 to 0.018 for Qwen (–74%) and from 0.067 to 0.020 for Llama (–70%). This is a secondary benefit: the method simultaneously achieves group-level guarantees and improves the overall quality of answers given. 

The case of Gemma. The low participation of HG-CRC for Gemma (0.084) merits discussion. Even at the global level, Gemma participates in only 29.4% of questions. The residual calibration further reduces participation: parent nodes are calibrated on examples not already answered by leaf nodes, a harder subpopulation, requiring more conservative thresholds. This is not a bug in the method—Gemma genuinely cannot certify most of its answers on ARC Challenge under α = 0 .10 —but it limits the practical utility of 

HG-CRC for this model on this dataset. We discuss this limitation further in Section 8. 

5.3 Why Marginal Guarantees Fail: Mixture Shift (E3) 

The results of Section 5.2 demonstrate that HG-CRC provides stronger per-group guarantees than global CRC. But one might ask: is this difference practically relevant? If real test distributions are close to the calibration distribution, global CRC may suffice. The mixture shift experiment directly tests this assumption by introducing a controlled mismatch between calibration and test group compositions. 

Setup. We construct a calibration set with equal group weights (1/3 each for easy, medium, hard) and a test set with a shifted mixture: hard examples are over-represented ( whard = 0 .50 , wmed = 0 .33 , weasy = 0 .17 ). This simulates a common real-world scenario: the deployment distribution shifts toward harder inputs over time, for example as easier questions are resolved and harder ones accumulate. We compare the violation rate of global CRC versus groupwise CRC under this shift. The results, shown in Table 3 and Figure 1, are striking. Global CRC violates the risk budget in 47% of bootstrap trials for Qwen and 32% for Llama. These are not marginal failures: the mean risk under global CRC sits right at the budget (0.099 for Qwen, essentially α = 0 .10 ) and exceeds it in nearly half of trials on the shifted test distribution. By contrast, groupwise CRC (which uses separate thresholds per difficulty group) achieves a violation rate of 0.00 for Qwen and Llama; for Gemma it is 0.11, lower than global’s 0.15 but still above δ = 0 .05 , because Gemma’s scores rank examples too poorly for any thresholding scheme to certify reliably under shift. This experiment reveals the mechanism of failure. Global CRC calibrates a single threshold τ ∗ such that the average error rate over the calibration mixture (1/3 easy, 1/3 medium, 1/3 hard) is at most α. On easy 12 Table 3: Mixture shift results on ARC Challenge. Calibration mixture: equal weights (1/3 each). Test mixture: hard over-represented (0.50/0.33/0.17). Groupwise CRC controls per-group risk for Qwen and Llama; global CRC fails for all three. For Gemma, groupwise also exceeds δ = 0 .05 (0.11), reflecting its poorly calibrated scores rather than a failure of the per-group principle. Model Global risk Global viol. Groupwise risk Groupwise viol. Qwen3-4B 0.099 ±0.028 0.47 0.034 ±0.019 0.00 

Llama-3.1-8B 0.086 ±0.032 0.32 0.032 ±0.021 0.00 

Gemma-3-4B 0.051 ±0.044 0.15 0.047 ±0.039 0.11 Qwen3 Gemma Llama  

> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> Violation rate
> E3 Mixture Shift Arc Challenge
> =0.1
> Global CRC
> Groupwise CRC

Figure 1: Mixture shift violation rates (ARC Challenge). Global CRC (blue) violates the risk budget in 15–47% of trials. Groupwise CRC (orange) controls per-group risk. The dashed line marks α = 0 .10 .examples, the model is accurate and can answer aggressively; on hard examples, it must abstain more. But 

τ ∗ is a compromise: it is too permissive for hard examples (causing violations) and too conservative for easy examples (causing unnecessary abstentions). When the test distribution shifts toward hard examples, the compromise threshold systematically under-serves that group. Groupwise CRC avoids this by estimating a separate threshold for each difficulty group, reflecting each group’s true error distribution. Hard examples get a conservative threshold; easy examples get an aggressive one. The result is that each group’s risk is controlled independently of the others, and the global risk under any test mixture is bounded. This experiment provides the core empirical motivation for HG-CRC : group-specific thresholds are necessary, and the hierarchical structure allows them to be estimated at multiple levels of granularity. 

What HG-CRC adds over flat groupwise CRC. It is important to note that the groupwise CRC used here is equivalent to Baseline B5: separate thresholds per difficulty group, calibrated independently, without hierarchical fallback or Bonferroni correction. B5 already resolves the 47% violation because per-group thresholds capture the heterogeneous error distributions. What B5 does not provide is a simultaneous 

guarantee: running K independent tests each at level δ yields a family-wise error rate of approximately 

Kδ under independence, not δ. HG-CRC extends B5 with two structural additions: (1) the Bonferroni correction, which restores the simultaneous guarantee at level δ (confirmed by the ablation in Section 6.2); and (2) the hierarchical structure with leaf-first fallback, which handles groups too small to certify directly by falling back to a coarser certified ancestor rather than abstaining all group members. The value of HG-CRC 

over B5 is therefore the formal simultaneous validity and graceful degradation for sparse groups—not the per-group thresholding idea itself, which B5 already implements. 13 Table 4: Endogenous vs. exogenous difficulty under mixture shift (ARC Challenge). In the exogenous rows, difficulty is defined by a different model’s score (in parentheses), independent of the deployed threshold. Global CRC fails under shift in both cases. Model (deployed) Difficulty source Global viol. Groupwise viol. Qwen3-4B endogenous (NLL) 0.47 0.00 

exogenous (Llama) 0.31 0.02 

Llama-3.1-8B endogenous (NLL) 0.32 0.00 

exogenous (Qwen) 0.36 0.02 

Gemma-3-4B endogenous (NLL) 0.15 0.11 

exogenous (Qwen) 0.39 0.07 

Table 5: Ablation of hierarchy depth (ARC Challenge, Qwen3-4B) and Bonferroni correction. ARC Challenge has a single domain (“science”), so its hierarchy is global → difficulty; the “Domain” depth row therefore adds a node that coincides with the global node and isolates the effect of the δ/ 2 Bonferroni tightening alone. The correction (A4) rows compare Bonferroni against no correction over the full five-node hierarchy (global 

+ domain + three difficulty leaves). All other hyperparameters fixed. Ablation Variant Risk Participation WGER Viol. rate Depth (A1) Global only 0.070 ±0.021 0.849 0.001 0.110 

Domain 0.065 ±0.021 0.830 0.001 0.054 

Domain+difficulty 0.018 ±0.013 0.478 0.000 0.000 

Correction (A4) Bonferroni 0.018 ±0.013 0.478 0.000 0.000 

None 0.026 ±0.014 0.584 0.000 0.000 

Is the effect structural or an endogeneity artifact? The difficulty bins above are defined by percentiles of the deployed NLL score, so “shift toward hard” coincides with “shift toward high deployed-NLL,” which could mechanically break an NLL threshold by construction. To test whether the failure is an artifact of this endogeneity, we redefine difficulty using an exogenous signal: a reference model’s per-example score (joined by 

example_id ), so that group membership is no longer a function of the deployed model’s threshold. We then repeat the mixture shift. Table 4 shows that the effect persists: under an exogenous difficulty shift, global CRC still violates in 31–39% of trials while groupwise CRC stays at or near the budget. Endogeneity does inflate the effect somewhat for Qwen (47% → 31%), but for Llama and Gemma the exogenous violation rate is as high or higher. We therefore conclude that the mixture-shift failure of marginal guarantees is structural ,not an artifact of how difficulty groups are constructed. 

# 6 Ablation Studies 

6.1 Effect of Hierarchy Depth (A1) 

How much does each level of the hierarchy contribute? An important caveat governs how to read this ablation on ARC Challenge: the dataset carries a single domain label (“science”), so ARC exposes no real domain level, and its deployed hierarchy is global → difficulty (two levels). We nonetheless report an intermediate 

domain row, but it does not introduce genuine domain structure: the domain node coincides with the global node, so this row isolates the effect of the δ/ 2 Bonferroni tightening on a redundant node rather than any subject-matter grouping. The three configurations are therefore: (i) global only , equivalent to standard CRC; (ii) domain , which adds the (redundant) single-domain node; and (iii) domain+difficulty , the deployed two-level global → difficulty hierarchy. The domain level is exercised as a genuine grouping only on MMLU-Pro, which has 57 real subjects (Appendix A), with the caveat that participation there is near zero. 14 Table 5 (top) shows the progression. Global-only CRC violates in 11.0% of trials. The intermediate domain 

row reduces violations to 5.4%, but on ARC this is not the effect of a domain grouping: the single-domain node coincides with the global node, so the only change is that its threshold is calibrated at ˆδ = δ/ 2 instead of δ. The tighter confidence level alone accounts for the drop, and at 500 trials this configuration still sits marginally above δ = 0 .05 (0.054), so it does not certify the guarantee. Adding the difficulty level brings violations to exactly 0.0%—on ARC it is the difficulty level, not any domain structure, that clears the budget. This makes the ARC hierarchy a genuine two-level global → difficulty structure whose load-bearing grouping is the difficulty binning. We note that these bins are defined by percentiles of the deployed NLL score, and Section 5.3 examines directly (via an exogenous difficulty signal) whether this endogeneity is what drives the effect; it is not. The participation cost falls from 0.849 (global) to 0.478 (global + difficulty). The drop at the difficulty level reflects the residual calibration: parent nodes are calibrated only on examples not already answered by certified leaf nodes, which are systematically harder, requiring more conservative thresholds. This is a reasonable exchange: the method eliminates all violations and achieves WGER = 0 with a theoretically sound guarantee that aligns calibration and deployment populations. 

6.2 Necessity of Bonferroni Correction (A4) 

A natural question is whether the Bonferroni correction is necessary, or whether the hierarchy alone suffices. Table 5 (bottom) compares calibration with and without the correction over the full ARC hierarchy (global 

+ domain + three difficulty leaves, |H| = 5 ). The empirical answer on ARC is that the correction is not needed to hold the budget: both the corrected (ˆδ = δ/ 5) and the uncorrected ( δ per node) variants achieve a 0.0% violation rate and WGER = 0 across all 500 trials. The two differ only in conservatism—Bonferroni answers less (participation 0.478 vs. 0.584 )and runs at lower realized risk ( 0.018 vs. 0.026 ). With only five nodes and well-separated NLL scores, the uncorrected per-node calibration is already conservative enough that the multiplicity it ignores does not materialize. (Our earlier report of a large “2%-to-16%” or “5.4%-to-11%” gap was an artifact of a degenerate ablation that corrected δ over a single node; over the real five-node hierarchy the empirical gap closes.) This does not make the correction dispensable—its role is theoretical, and it scales with |H| . Without it, each node is calibrated at the full level δ, so the family-wise error rate across |H| nodes may reach |H| · δ; the correction is what makes the simultaneous claim of Propositions 1 and 2 valid, independent of any empirical run. On ARC ( |H| = 5 ) that theoretical bound leaves ample slack, so removing the correction happens to remain safe. When many nodes are tested the effect becomes visible: on MMLU-Pro (57 subjects), removing the correction raises the violation rate from 0.6% to 14 .0% —though this is in a regime where the model answers almost nothing (participation ≈0.001 –0.018 ), so the inflation certifies the theory rather than a deployable operating point. The honest summary is therefore: the Bonferroni correction is required for the theoretical simultaneous guarantee at any |H| , while its empirical cost and benefit are an |H| -dependent participation trade-off— negligible on ARC’s shallow hierarchy and pronounced only when many nodes are corrected at once. 

6.3 Uncertainty Score Comparison (A5) 

Table 6 shows that the NLL-based scores yield essentially the same participation and violation rates. Three of them—selected-option NLL, min log-prob, and sequence NLL—are in fact identical by construction in this multiple-choice setting (all equal − max k log p′

> k

), so their matching rows are not independent evidence; MC margin is a genuinely distinct score that nonetheless performs comparably. Token entropy performs comparably but with slightly higher variance. The meta-learner, which combines multiple scores through a trained regressor, loses participation (0.772 vs. 0.849) without a corresponding reduction in violations—a worse trade-off. The linear probe classifier, trained to predict correctness, performs poorly: it achieves only 5.0% participation because its confidence estimates are poorly calibrated for this thresholding task. These results suggest that the choice of uncertainty score is not a critical design decision for CRC-based selective prediction: any NLL-based score that ranks examples by confidence produces similar 15 Table 6: Uncertainty score comparison on ARC Challenge (Qwen3-4B). NLL-based scores are largely equivalent; probe yields negligible participation. Score Risk Participation Viol. rate Selected-option NLL (default) 0.070 0.849 0.110 

Min log-prob 0.070 0.849 0.110 

MC margin 0.070 0.841 0.104 

Token entropy 0.071 0.850 0.100 

Sequence NLL 0.070 0.849 0.110 

Meta-learner 0.070 0.772 0.112 

Linear probe 0.013 0.050 0.100 

Table 7: MMLU-Pro → ARC participation by ntarget (Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct). Source-only transfers partially; target-only scales from 0 to 71%. Strategy n=0 n=25 n=50 n=100 n=250 n=500 

Source only 0.288 0.288 0.287 0.287 0.287 0.288 

Weighted 0.378 0.378 0.377 0.377 0.377 0.377 

Target only 0.000 0.000 0.277 0.559 0.682 0.704 

Combined 0.288 0.327 0.337 0.358 0.386 0.417 

results. We use the selected-option NLL as the default throughout, as it requires no additional computation beyond the forward pass. 

# 7 Robustness Analysis 

7.1 Domain Shift (E4) 

We evaluate the ability of a threshold calibrated on one dataset to transfer to a different dataset. We consider two domain-shift pairs: MMLU-Pro → ARC Challenge (both multiple-choice) and NQ Open →

TriviaQA (both open-domain QA). For each pair, we study four strategies: (i) source-only , which uses only the source-domain calibration; (ii) target-only , which uses ntarget labeled examples from the target domain; (iii) weighted , which re-weights source examples by estimated density ratio; and (iv) combined , which pools source and target calibration data. Table 7 shows results for Llama on the MMLU → ARC pair. Source-only transfer achieves 28.8% participation, which is lower than ARC IID (69.5%) but non-negligible—MMLU and ARC are both multiple-choice reasoning tasks, so the score distributions are partially compatible. For Qwen and Gemma, source-only participation is zero: the MMLU threshold is too conservative to certify any ARC example, suggesting a larger distributional shift in score space for these models. The target-only strategy shows a clear sample-efficiency curve: 0% participation with fewer than 50 target examples, 27.7% with 50, and reaching 70.4% with 500—close to the IID level. Fewer than 50 examples provide insufficient statistical power for the CP bound: with ntarget = 25 , even the zero-error threshold cannot be certified at α = 0 .10 with δ = 0 .05 . This minimum sample requirement is a practical constraint: CRC-based methods cannot be deployed in zero-shot domain transfer scenarios. The combined strategy improves over source-only for Llama (41.7% with n = 500 ) by incorporating target data, but it does not outperform target-only at equal n. This suggests that the source distribution provides useful information about the general behavior of the uncertainty score, but target-specific examples are necessary for domain-adapted certification. 16 Table 8: Prompt shift results (ARC Challenge, Qwen3-4B). Transferred threshold (from default template) vs. recalibrated threshold (using examples from the new template). Template Risk (transfer) Risk (recalib) Part (transfer) Part (recalib) Default 0.073 0.073 0.869 0.869 

Reasoning 0.203 0.067 0.674 0.360 

Formal 0.078 0.078 0.900 0.900 

Table 9: Label noise robustness (ARC Challenge, Qwen3-4B). As η increases, the method becomes more conservative (lower participation) rather than violating (higher risk). 

η Risk Participation Violation rate 

0.00 0.070 ±0.021 0.849 ±0.041 0.11 0.01 0.065 ±0.021 0.830 ±0.045 0.06 0.05 0.028 ±0.019 0.566 ±0.197 0.00 0.10 0.002 ±0.006 0.085 ±0.174 0.00 

The NQ → TriviaQA transfer shows zero participation under all strategies and all ntarget , indicating that open-domain QA tasks are structurally incompatible for threshold transfer: the score distributions and error rates differ too substantially across open-domain datasets for source calibration to be useful. 

7.2 Prompt Shift (E5) 

Prompt engineering is a common practice in LLM deployment, but changes in prompt formatting alter the model’s probability distribution over answers, thereby invalidating a previously calibrated threshold. We study three prompt templates: default (standard few-shot), reasoning (chain-of-thought prompt with explicit reasoning steps), and formal (formal academic phrasing). For each, we measure the risk and participation of the transferred threshold (calibrated on default examples) and the recalibrated threshold (calibrated on examples from the new template). The results reveal a template-dependent pattern. The formal template produces a distribution close to the default: transfer risk is 0.078, only marginally above the default level, and recalibration has no effect. The reasoning template, by contrast, induces a severe shift: the transferred threshold yields a risk of 0.203—more than twice the budget α = 0 .10 . This is because reasoning-prompted outputs have a higher entropy: the model distributes probability over multiple reasoning steps before committing to an answer, yielding higher NLL scores even on correctly-answered questions. The threshold from the default calibration, which was chosen for lower-entropy default outputs, is too aggressive for reasoning outputs: it answers many questions that the reasoning model is actually uncertain about, leading to high risk. Recalibration immediately restores the guarantee: a threshold calibrated on reasoning examples achieves risk of 0.067 < 0.10. However, it comes at a significant participation cost (0.360 vs. 0.674 under transfer), reflecting the genuinely higher entropy of reasoning-prompted outputs. The message is clear: prompt changes require recalibration . The good news is that recalibration is cheap—a few hundred labeled examples from the new template suffice—and the guarantee is restored without any retraining. 

7.3 Label Noise Robustness (E7) 

Real-world labels are noisy: human annotators make mistakes, automatic evaluation pipelines occasionally mis-grade, and ground-truth answers may be ambiguous. We study the sensitivity of HG-CRC to label noise by injecting random label flips at rate η ∈ { 0, 0.01 , 0.05 , 0.10 } into the calibration labels. The results, shown in Table 9 and Figure 2, reveal a highly desirable property: label noise causes the method to become more conservative, not less safe . As η increases from 0 to 0.10, participation 17 0.00 0.01 0.05 0.10  

> Label noise
> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.10
> Risk
> E7 Label Noise Arc Challenge
> Qwen3 Risk
> Gemma Risk
> Llama Risk
> =0.1
> Qwen3 Part.
> Gemma Part.
> Llama Part.
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Participation

Figure 2: Label noise robustness (ARC Challenge). Risk (solid lines, left axis) and participation (dashed lines, right axis) as a function of noise rate η for three models. Noise causes conservative abstention, not risk violation. drops from 0.849 to 0.085, while violations drop from 0.11 to 0.00. The mechanism is straightforward: noisy labels artificially inflate the empirical error rate kv (τ )/n v (τ ), which tightens the CP upper bound. To remain certified, the threshold must be more conservative, abstaining on more examples. At η = 0 .01 , the effect is mild: participation drops by only 1.9 pp, and violations are already nearly halved (0.06). At η = 0 .05 , the system abstains on nearly half of all examples—a significant participation loss, but one that reflects genuine uncertainty about label quality. At η = 0 .10 , the system becomes nearly non-functional (8.5% participation), but it never violates the risk budget. This graceful degradation is a valuable property for high-stakes deployments where label quality cannot be guaranteed. A system that fails loudly (by abstaining excessively) is preferable to one that fails silently (by answering incorrectly with high confidence). The behavior here is the former. 

7.4 Quantization Robustness (E8) 

Model quantization is a standard technique for reducing inference cost in production deployments. Quantizing weights from 16-bit floating point (bf16) to 8-bit integer (int8) or 4-bit integer (int4) reduces memory by 2× and 4 × respectively, with a typically small accuracy penalty. However, quantization also changes the model’s probability distributions, which may affect the uncertainty score distribution and thereby invalidate a calibration performed at full precision. Table 10 and Figure 3 show the results. Accuracy decreases modestly with quantization: Qwen loses 2.8 pp from bf16 to int4, Llama loses 3.1 pp, and Gemma loses 3.7 pp. These are typical quantization penalties. The key finding is that risk remains below α = 0 .10 at all precision levels for all models . This is because CRC calibration is performed at inference time at the same precision used for deployment: if the deployment model is quantized, the calibration should also use the quantized model. The calibration automatically adapts to the score distribution of the quantized model. Participation is more sensitive to quantization. For Gemma, participation drops from 0.294 (bf16) to 0.058 (int4)—an 80% reduction. This reflects the fact that int4 quantization increases score uncertainty for Gemma, pushing more examples above the certification threshold. For Qwen and Llama, the participation drop is smaller (9.3 pp and 7.7 pp from bf16 to int4 respectively). At our earlier 50-trial resolution, Llama int8 appeared anomalous, with a violation rate of 0.24 against 0.08 (bf16) and 0.06 (int4). This anomaly does not survive at 500 trials: the Llama violation rates are 0.09 (bf16), 18 Table 10: Quantization robustness (ARC Challenge). Accuracy decreases modestly; risk stays below α=0.10 

at all precision levels. Model Precision Accuracy Participation Risk Viol. rate Qwen3-4B bf16 0.874 0.849 0.070 0.11 

int8 0.863 0.813 0.070 0.08 

int4 0.846 0.756 0.069 0.09 

Gemma-3-4B bf16 0.777 0.294 0.054 0.09 

int8 0.760 0.207 0.045 0.11 

int4 0.741 0.058 0.025 0.15 

Llama-3.1-8B bf16 0.824 0.695 0.067 0.09 

int8 0.818 0.702 0.068 0.11 

int4 0.793 0.618 0.065 0.08 Qwen3 Gemma Llama      

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Accuracy
> Accuracy
> bf16
> int8
> int4
> Qwen3 Gemma Llama
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> Participation
> Participation
> bf16
> int8
> int4
> Qwen3 Gemma Llama
> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.10
> Risk
> Risk
> =0.1
> bf16
> int8
> int4
> E8 Quantization Arc Challenge

Figure 3: Quantization robustness (ARC Challenge). Accuracy (left), participation (center), and risk (right) for all three models at bf16, int8, and int4 precision. Risk is controlled at all precision levels; participation is most affected for Gemma. 0.11 (int8), and 0.08 (int4), i.e. flat and within sampling noise of one another. The apparent non-monotonicity was a small-sample artifact of the 50-trial bootstrap rather than a genuine effect of 8-bit quantization, which is a further illustration of why the higher-resolution evaluation matters. Across all models and precisions, risk stays below α and violation rates remain in the same finite-calibration-sample regime as the bf16 baseline. 

7.5 Difficulty Shift (E6) 

The difficulty shift experiment tests a specific covariate shift: calibration and test sets have different difficulty compositions. We consider two directions: cal-easy/test-hard , where calibration uses only easy examples and the test set contains only hard examples; and cal-hard/test-easy , the reverse. In the cal-easy/test-hard direction, both transfer and IID calibration yield 0% participation. This is a fundamental limitation: hard examples have an intrinsic error rate above α = 0 .10 for these models, meaning that no threshold can simultaneously certify them and maintain risk control. The method correctly abstains on all hard examples rather than certifying them under false pretenses. 19 In the cal-hard/test-easy direction, transfer calibration also yields 0% participation—but for a different reason. The threshold calibrated on hard examples is excessively conservative: hard examples require a very low NLL score to be certifiable, and that same threshold abstains on virtually all easy examples as well. IID calibration on easy examples, by contrast, achieves 100% participation with a mean risk of 0.008—well below budget. This illustrates the direction-dependence of threshold transfer under difficulty shift: a pessimistic calibration is safe but useless; an optimistic calibration is useful but unsafe; correct calibration requires examples from the target difficulty distribution. We caution that part of this clean behavior is again endogenous: when easy/hard are defined by the deployed NLL, the easy-calibrated threshold mechanically abstains on all high-NLL (hard) examples, so the easy →hard transfer risk is 0.000 almost by construction. Repeating the experiment with exogenous difficulty (hard defined by a reference model’s score, as in Section 5.3) removes this mechanism: the easy-calibrated threshold then answers a non-trivial fraction of exogenously-hard examples and incurs a genuine transfer risk of 0.233 for Qwen—well above α. The qualitative lesson (optimistic transfer is unsafe) is unchanged, but the exogenous version is the honest illustration of it. 

# 8 Discussion 

8.1 The Participation-Guarantee Trade-off 

The fundamental tension in selective prediction is between answering more (higher participation) and ensuring reliability (lower risk, no violations). HG-CRC navigates this trade-off by applying the tightest applicable threshold to each example, which necessarily increases abstention relative to global CRC. The trade-off can be characterized precisely: the additional abstention of HG-CRC relative to global CRC is proportional to the degree of group heterogeneity. In the limit where all groups have identical distributions, the leaf-first policy selects the global threshold for every example, and HG-CRC coincides with global CRC. In the limit of maximally heterogeneous groups, the leaf-level thresholds dominate and the participation cost is maximized. Our results suggest that for ARC Challenge, the heterogeneity across difficulty levels (ARC has a single domain) is sufficient to justify the additional abstention: HG-CRC reduces violations from 9–11% to 0% at a participation cost of 22–37 pp relative to global CRC. This cost arises from residual calibration: parent nodes are calibrated on the harder subpopulation not covered by certified leaf nodes, which requires more conservative thresholds. We consider this a principled trade-off—the guarantee now formally covers the deployed population—for applications where per-group fairness is a requirement. 

8.2 Equal-Participation Comparison: Is It the Guarantee or the Conservatism? 

HG-CRC attains lower risk and fewer violations than global CRC partly because it answers fewer questions. To separate the contribution of the per-group structure from that of conservatism , we run a controlled comparison: in each bootstrap trial we measure HG-CRC ’s participation on the test fold and then construct a single global threshold tuned to match that exact participation (the test-score quantile at HG-CRC ’s coverage—this uses test scores but no test labels), and compare the two at equal coverage. We report the 

worst-group violation rate : the maximum over difficulty groups of the fraction of trials in which that group’s realized risk exceeds α. Table 11 shows the result on ARC Challenge, in both the IID setting and under the E3 mixture shift. The finding is deflating but important for honest framing. At equal participation, a single global threshold controls per-group risk about as well as HG-CRC —worst-group violation rates are within sampling noise in five of the six cells, the exception being Gemma under shift, where HG-CRC is somewhat safer ( 0.054 vs. 0.086 ). For comparison, standard global CRC at its own (higher) participation has worst-group violation rates of 0.70 –0.96 in these same settings; that catastrophic number is therefore overwhelmingly a consequence of answering too much, not of single thresholds being intrinsically unable to protect groups. This does not make HG-CRC redundant, but it sharpens what its empirical contribution is and is not. 

HG-CRC does not buy a large per-group-safety margin over a coverage-matched global threshold. What it buys is (i) an automatic mechanism for finding a safe per-group operating point—the coverage-matched 20 Table 11: Equal-participation comparison (ARC Challenge, worst-group violation rate over difficulty groups). 

global-eq is a single threshold tuned to HG-CRC ’s participation. At matched coverage, global-eq and 

HG-CRC control per-group risk almost equally; the large worst-group violation of standard global CRC (at its own, higher participation) is mostly a coverage effect, not a failure of single thresholds per se .Setting Model Matched part. global-eq HG-CRC 

IID Qwen3-4B 0.478 0.010 0.010 

Llama-3.1-8B 0.475 0.020 0.022 

Gemma-3-4B 0.084 0.024 0.024 

Mixture shift Qwen3-4B 0.350 0.010 0.010 

Llama-3.1-8B 0.300 0.014 0.014 

Gemma-3-4B 0.079 0.086 0.054 

global-eq above requires an oracle ( HG-CRC ’s own test participation) that a standalone global method does not have—and (ii) the formal simultaneous guarantee and graceful degradation for sparse groups (Section 5.3). The practical case for HG-CRC rests on these, not on out-violating a global threshold at equal coverage. 

8.3 Limitations 

Scope of the main result. Our headline finding—0% violation and WGER = 0 —holds specifically on ARC Challenge and only for models whose base accuracy is well above 1 − α (Qwen3-4B and Llama-3.1-8B). It does not generalize to our second benchmark. On MMLU-Pro, Qwen3-4B and Gemma-3-4B have base error rates above 56%, so no non-trivial threshold is certifiable and participation collapses to 0% across all methods; Llama-3.1-8B, the only model that participates meaningfully there, retains a non-zero WGER of 0.014 because the per-node calibration sets are too small to certify all hierarchy nodes simultaneously (Appendix A). The practical envelope of HG-CRC is therefore narrow: it certifies a group-conditional guarantee only when the model is already accurate enough on the deployment distribution that a useful fraction of examples clears the per-group thresholds; otherwise it correctly, but uninformatively, abstains. 

WGER rewards abstention. Our worst-group excess risk is computed only over answered examples (max g (Rg − α)+, with the maximum taken over groups that answer at least one example). A group that abstains on everything does not contribute to WGER, so a system that abstains heavily can attain WGER ≈ 0

trivially. This is by design—an abstention carries no error—but it means WGER must be read jointly with the participation rate: Gemma’s near-zero WGER coexists with very low participation and is closer to this degenerate regime than to a genuine guarantee. We therefore report participation alongside every WGER. 

Empirical, not unconditional, in-sample guarantee. The deployed procedure is the in-sample variant covered by Lemma 1, whose guarantee carries an additive slack εn; the distribution-free split bound (Proposi-tion 1, εn = 0 ) is implemented but not deployed. While the mean measured slack is below 1%, on the small ARC pool the maximum jackknife slack reaches εn ≈ 0.34 , so the worst-case in-sample guarantee on that benchmark is materially weaker than the headline numbers suggest. The procedure we evaluate thus carries an empirical guarantee under Assumption 1, not an unconditional one. 

Minimum group size constraint. The Nmin requirement prunes nodes with insufficient calibration data. In datasets with many fine-grained groups (e.g., 57 MMLU-Pro subjects × 3 difficulty levels = 171 potential leaf nodes), most leaf nodes will be pruned for typical calibration set sizes. The hierarchy effectively collapses to a shallower structure, potentially losing the granularity needed for fine-grained protection. This is an inherent limitation of nonparametric methods: statistical power is required to certify each node, and small groups simply do not have enough calibration examples. 

Gemma-3-4B on ARC Challenge. The consistently low participation of Gemma across all experimental conditions reflects a fundamental incompatibility between the model’s uncertainty distribution and the dataset at the chosen α. Gemma’s NLL scores are high and diffuse on ARC questions, suggesting that the model is genuinely uncertain about multiple-choice science questions at this scale. Raising α would allow more 21 participation but at the cost of weaker guarantees. Alternatively, this behavior may improve with larger model scales or better uncertainty score calibration. 

Cross-domain transfer without target examples. E4 shows that source-only calibration fails for Qwen and Gemma on MMLU → ARC transfer. This limits the applicability of HG-CRC in zero-shot domain adaptation scenarios where labeled target examples are not available. Practical deployments must either collect target calibration data (which E4 shows requires at least 50 examples) or accept the reduced participation of source-only calibration. 

Quantization. An apparent int8 anomaly for Llama (a 0.24 violation rate at 50 trials) turned out to be a small-sample artifact: at 500 trials the violation rates across bf16/int8/int4 are flat (0.09/0.11/0.08) and within sampling noise. We nonetheless recommend recalibrating from scratch whenever precision is changed, rather than reusing a threshold from a different precision level, since the score distribution does shift with precision even when the resulting violation rate does not. 

Conservatism of Bonferroni. Bonferroni is a worst-case correction that ignores positive correlation between nodes (higher nodes include all examples of lower nodes). More powerful procedures such as Holm-Bonferroni, Benjamini-Hochberg, or hierarchical testing (Yekutieli, 2008) could recover some participation without sacrificing the simultaneous guarantee. We leave this as future work. 

Participation-unequal comparisons. HG-CRC achieves lower violation rates and lower mean risk partly because it answers fewer questions: a sufficiently conservative method can always achieve low risk by abstaining on uncertain inputs. We now address this confound directly in Section 8.2, where we equalize participation by tuning a single global threshold to HG-CRC ’s coverage and compare worst-group violation at equal coverage. The honest result is that, at matched participation, the global threshold controls per-group risk about as well as HG-CRC in our settings; the apparent advantage of HG-CRC over standard global CRC is therefore mostly attributable to its lower participation, not to the per-group structure per se. We retain HG-CRC for its automatic selection of a safe per-group operating point and its formal simultaneous guarantee, rather than for an empirical per-group-safety margin at equal coverage. 

Endogenous difficulty groups. Our difficulty bins are defined by percentiles of the NLL uncertainty score—the same score used for thresholding. This creates an alignment between group membership and threshold behavior by construction: the “hard” bin contains high-NLL examples, so the CRC threshold calibrated on this bin will naturally be a larger NLL value. This caveat is load-bearing rather than cosmetic: because ARC collapses to a single domain (above), the only non-trivial grouping for our most dramatic experiment (the mixture shift of Section 5.3, where global CRC reaches a 47% violation rate) is the endogenous difficulty partition, and “shifting toward hard” is by definition “shifting toward high NLL”—precisely the direction that breaks an NLL threshold. We address this directly in Section 5.3 (Table 4) by redefining difficulty with an exogenous signal—a reference model’s score, independent of the deployed threshold. The mixture-shift failure persists under exogenous difficulty (global CRC violates in 31–39% of trials), so the effect is structural rather than an artifact of the endogenous bins; endogeneity inflates the magnitude only modestly (47% → 31% for Qwen). The residual limitation is that our exogenous signal is still a model-derived score rather than a human difficulty label, which the loaded allenai/ai2_arc distribution does not provide; a comparison against human grade-level labels from the original ARC release remains future work. 

# 9 Conclusion 

We introduced HG-CRC , a post-hoc calibration framework for selective prediction in language models that provides simultaneous risk guarantees across all nodes of a user-defined group hierarchy. The method combines three components: Bonferroni correction to control the family-wise error rate across nodes, a leaf-first selection policy to apply the most specific applicable threshold, and a minimum group size filter to ensure that uncertifiable nodes do not enter the hierarchy. Our main empirical finding is that HG-CRC achieves a zero empirical violation rate and WGER = 0 

for Qwen3-4B and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct on ARC Challenge, with a participation cost of 22 to 37 percentage points relative to global CRC. These zeros are upper bounds at the resolution of our 500-trial evaluation (∼0.6% by the rule of three), not certified zeros, and they are specific to ARC Challenge and to models 22 whose base accuracy is well above 1 − α; on MMLU-Pro the guarantee is not met (Llama: WGER = 0 .014 )or the model abstains entirely (Appendix A). Ablation studies show that the hierarchical depth is the component that clears the risk budget on ARC: removing the difficulty level reinstates an 11% violation rate. The Bonferroni correction is required for the theoretical simultaneous guarantee, but its empirical effect is 

|H| -dependent—negligible on ARC’s five-node hierarchy (where corrected and uncorrected calibration both control risk) and visible only when many nodes are tested, as on MMLU-Pro. Beyond the main result, our empirical study demonstrates that: global CRC fails catastrophically under mild group composition shift (47% violation rate); label noise causes graceful conservatism rather than violation; prompt changes require recalibration but can be corrected cheaply; and model quantization does not break risk control as long as calibration is performed at the deployed precision. These results position HG-CRC as a practically deployable method for equitable selective prediction: it requires no retraining, adapts to any pre-trained model and uncertainty score, and provides formal statistical guarantees with transparent assumptions. 

# Ethics Statement 

Selective prediction with abstain can introduce disparate abstention rates across groups: if minority groups receive more abstentions, they may receive less service. HG-CRC provides WGER = 0, which ensures that no group’s error rate exceeds the budget, but it does not directly control participation equity. A group with a structurally high error rate will always receive lower participation than a group with a low error rate, for the same α. Practitioners should monitor participation rates across groups in addition to risk rates. The datasets used (ARC Challenge, MMLU-Pro) reflect cultural and linguistic biases toward Western educational systems and English-language knowledge. Results may not generalize to other languages, cultures, or educational backgrounds. 

# Reproducibility Statement 

All models used are publicly available on HuggingFace. Code, calibration scripts, and evaluation scripts will be released upon acceptance. All experiments use fixed random seeds. Key hyperparameters: α = 0 .10 ,

δ = 0 .05 , Nmin = 30 , nbootstrap = 500 , threshold grid of 100 quantiles. Model inference was performed on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU; calibration and bootstrap evaluation were performed on CPU. Expected runtimes: inference caching ≈2–4 hours per model-dataset pair; calibration+evaluation ≈5 minutes per experimental configuration. 

# References 

Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Adam Fisch, Lihua Lei, and Tal Schuster. Conformal risk control. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2208.02814 .Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J. Candès, Aaditya Ramdas, and Ryan J. Tibshirani. The limits of distribution-free conditional predictive inference. volume 10, pp. 455–482, 2021. Henrik Boström, Ulf Johansson, and Tuwe Löfström. Mondrian conformal prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08394 , 2021. Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? Try ARC, the AI2 reasoning challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457 , 2018. Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Lesecq, et al. The Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. 23 Ran El-Yaniv and Yair Wiener. On the foundations of noise-free selective classification. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11:1605–1641, 2010. Yonatan Geifman and Ran El-Yaniv. Selective prediction in deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017. Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Uncertainty estimation in autoregressive structured prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07650 , 2021. Yaniv Romano, Rina Foygel Barber, Chiara Sabbati, and Emmanuel J. Candès. With malice toward none: Assessing uncertainty via equalized coverage. Harvard Data Science Review , 2020a. Yaniv Romano, Matteo Sesia, and Emmanuel J. Candès. Classification with valid and adaptive coverage. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020b. Gemma Team. Gemma 3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786 , 2025a. Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025b. Vladimir Vovk, Ilia Nouretdinov, and Glenn Shafer. Venn prediction and conformal prediction: A note on efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:0911.4728 , 2009. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shengquan Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, et al. MMLU-Pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Daniel Yekutieli. Hierarchical false discovery rate-controlling methodology. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 103(481):309–316, 2008. 

# A Extended Results: MMLU-Pro 

MMLU-Pro results are qualitatively different from ARC Challenge due to structural model limitations. Qwen3-4B and Gemma-3-4B have base error rates above 56% on MMLU-Pro, meaning that even the most conservative threshold cannot certify a non-trivial fraction of examples under α = 0 .10 . As a result, participation is essentially 0% for these models across all methods (at 500 trials, global participation is exactly 0.000 for both, with at most ∼2% residual participation for the groupwise variant of Qwen). Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct achieves moderate accuracy and participates meaningfully ( ∼2.7% under the hierarchy, 9.1% under global); however, hierarchical results for Llama on MMLU-Pro show a non-zero WGER of 0.014 , indicating that simultaneous certification of all hierarchy nodes is not fully achieved with the available calibration size (MMLU-Pro has fewer examples per domain than ARC Challenge). This is smaller than the 0.059 we measured at 50 trials, but it remains above zero, so the headline “WGER = 0 ” result does not extend to this benchmark. These results illustrate an important practical point: HG-CRC is most effective when the model’s base accuracy on the deployment dataset is well above 1 − α. For weaker models or harder datasets, the method correctly abstains rather than providing false guarantees, but this comes at the cost of utility. 

# B Extended E5: All Models 

Table 12 extends the prompt shift results to Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and Gemma-3-4B. 24 Table 12: Prompt shift results (ARC Challenge, all models). Model Template Risk (transfer) Risk (recalib) Part (transfer) Part (recalib) Llama-3.1-8B Default 0.077 0.077 0.729 0.729 

Reasoning 0.043 0.075 0.525 0.640 

Formal 0.099 0.074 0.812 0.760 

Gemma-3-4B Default 0.073 0.073 0.521 0.521 

Reasoning 0.048 0.071 0.354 0.460 

Formal 0.062 0.073 0.504 0.599 

Interestingly, for Llama and Gemma, the reasoning template does not cause a transfer risk violation—it actually reduces risk below α (0.043 and 0.048 respectively). This is the reverse of the Qwen behavior. The reasoning template shifts probability mass toward the correct answer for these models (chain-of-thought improves accuracy), so the transferred threshold is too conservative: it abstains more than needed. Recalibration adjusts the threshold upward, recovering participation. For Qwen, by contrast, reasoning outputs are more diffuse (CoT introduces uncertainty), causing the transferred threshold to be too aggressive. This model-dependence underscores the importance of per-model recalibration after prompt changes: the direction of the transfer error depends on whether the new prompt improves or degrades model confidence. 

# C Domain Shift: NQ → TriviaQA 

The NQ → TriviaQA transfer consistently shows zero participation under all strategies and all ntarget values. We attribute this to two factors. First, open-domain QA has a fundamentally higher variance in difficulty than multiple-choice tasks: question phrasing, required factual knowledge, and answer specificity vary widely. Second, NQ and TriviaQA differ substantially in answer style (NQ requires short answers to web queries; TriviaQA requires recall of trivia facts), leading to different NLL distributions. The NQ threshold cannot certify TriviaQA examples because the score distributions do not overlap usefully. 

# D Ablation: Nmin Sensitivity (A3) 

Table 13: Nmin sensitivity (ARC Challenge, Qwen3-4B, 500 bootstrap trials). Nmin is the minimum node size below which a leaf is pruned and its examples fall back to the parent. ARC has a single domain, so the full hierarchy is global + domain + three difficulty leaves ( |H| = 5 ); once Nmin exceeds the per-leaf calibration size the difficulty leaves are pruned and |H| collapses to 2.

Nmin |H| Risk Participation WGER Viol. rate 25 5 0.018 0.478 0.000 0.000 

50 5 0.018 0.478 0.000 0.000 

100 5 0.018 0.478 0.000 0.000 

200 2 0.065 0.830 0.000 0.054 

Table 13 shows a single, interpretable transition. As long as Nmin is small enough to retain the three difficulty leaves ( Nmin ≤ 100 , since each leaf holds ≈110 –120 calibration examples in a 50% split), the hierarchy has 

|H| = 5 and achieves zero violations at participation 0.478 . Once Nmin = 200 prunes the difficulty leaves, the hierarchy collapses to |H| = 2 (global + the redundant single domain), participation rises to 0.830 , and violations reappear ( 5.4% )—the system has degenerated to essentially global CRC. The lesson is that Nmin 

must be small enough to keep the difficulty leaves alive; we recommend Nmin ∈ [25 , 100] for ARC. The range of |H| here is modest ( 2–5) because ARC has one domain and three difficulty bins; datasets with real domain structure (MMLU-Pro) admit larger hierarchies. 25 Correction. An earlier version of this table reported |H| up to ∼18 with a graded participation sweep. Those numbers did not correspond to the ARC pipeline (which admits at most five nodes) and could not be reproduced by the ARC or the MMLU-Pro ablation harness; they have been replaced by the run above. 26