Title: What Should We Measure Next? Finding Identification Strategies by Refining Mechanisms

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.08092v1

Published Time: Wed, 07 Oct 2026 01:15:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# What Should We Measure Next? Finding Identification Strategies by Refining Mechanisms 

Mikko V¨ a¨ an¨ anen Fanyu Cui Carlos Cinelli Santtu Tikka 

# Abstract 

Canonical approaches in causal inference treat model specification as fixed, assuming that re-searchers directly translate all relevant domain knowledge into a causal model, which can then be used to deduce its logical implications. Yet, in practical applications, model specification is often an iterative process, and involves explo-ration and introspection—of the many aspects of the phenomenon one could investigate, which ones actually matter for the identification of the causal effect of interest? In this paper we study the problem of iterative identification in par-tially specified causal models. We focus on de-termining where observing variables that inter-cept a direct effect or a confounding path be-tween two variables could enable identification in semi-Markovian models. We give necessary and sufficient graphical conditions for when observ-ing such variables can render an unidentifiable query identifiable, together with an efficient al-gorithm for locating all such opportunities in a given causal diagram. Our results can help ana-lysts better navigate the model space by drawing attention to the parts of their substantive knowl-edge that could result in a successful identifica-tion strategy. 

# 1 Introduction 

Causal inference combines observations with as-sumptions about the data generating process. Once these assumptions are represented in a causal diagram, identification theory determines whether the effect of interest can be recov-ered from the available observational distribu-tion (Pearl, 1995; Shpitser and Pearl, 2006). When it cannot, a natural question arises: what additional information would make identification possible? Answering this question requires deciding which further aspects of the phenomenon to bring into consideration. Researchers may pos-sess considerable knowledge that has not been expressed in their current causal diagram, with-out recognizing its relevance to the effect of in-terest (Cinelli et al., 2025). A directed edge may summarize a mechanism they could describe in greater detail, and a bidirected edge may rep-resent common causes they could investigate. A priori, a researcher could expand the mech-anisms behind any and all of those arrows, but that is a formidable task. Ideally, we want a sys-tem that helps direct the researcher’s attention to the information that matters. In this paper, we use causal diagrams to guide that reflection. We characterize where observing mediators or common causes would render a pre-1arXiv:2610.08092v1 [stat.ME] 6 Oct 2026 viously nonidentifiable causal effect identifiable. These results direct the researcher toward par-ticular mechanisms and sources of confounding, helping them recognize which parts of their do-main knowledge could provide a way forward. To illustrate, consider the simplest setting, in which a researcher starts their analysis with the causal diagram in Figure 1(a). Here, X denotes the treatment and Y the outcome, while the bidi-rected edge X ↔ Y allows for unmeasured con-founding between them. The causal effect of in-terest is therefore not identifiable without fur-ther assumptions. What next steps could an in-vestigator take in such circumstances? A well-known strategy for identifying the causal effect of X on Y is to block the confound-ing paths between them, an approach with a long history in causal inference (Rosenbaum and Ru-bin, 1983; Robins, 1986; Pearl, 1995). In Fig-ure 1(b), these common causes are represented by expanding the edge X ↔ Y with a (possi-bly vector-valued) variable N (for “new”). The causal effect is now identifiable by backdoor ad-justment. However, this is not the only identifi-cation strategy available here. An alternative route is to investigate the mediating channels through which the causal effect of X flows to Y ,as in Figure 1(c). This is represented by expand-ing the directed edge X → Y with mediators 

N , which now allows identification of the causal effect through Pearl’s celebrated frontdoor for-mula, even though the original confounding path 

X ↔ Y remains intact. For general causal models, we consider exten-sions of the original diagram that replace a di-rected edge with a path through mediators or a bidirected edge with observed common causes. We focus on expanding one edge at a time, as this represents the minimal refinement of the original causal diagram that may suffice to identify the     

> XY
> (a)
> XYN
> (b)
> XNY
> (c)

Figure 1: Two ways to make p(y|do( x)) identifi-able. (a) The original graph, in which the effect is not identifiable. (b) Observed common causes 

N allow identification by backdoor adjustment. (c) Observed mediators N allow identification through the frontdoor criterion. The newly ob-served node and its related edges are highlighted in blue. effect of interest. We call these operations edge expansions and call an edge ID-enabling when its expansion makes the target effect identifiable. These edges indicate where further substantive knowledge could yield a successful identification strategy. Our contributions are as follows: 1. We derive simple graphical conditions for quickly finding ID-enabling directed and bidirected edges, and ruling out edges whose expansion cannot enable identifica-tion. These conditions are fast and pow-erful: across our experimental settings, they fully resolve 87 .7–100% of nonidenti-fied queries and find an ID-enabling edge in more than 99 .9% of cases whenever a solu-tion exists. 2. Next, we derive necessary and sufficient conditions for ID-enabling edges based on graphical obstructions to identification, known as hedges . We then develop a sound, complete, and efficient algorithm for find-ing all such edges. For example, for a graph with n nodes and m edges, our algorithm 2retains at most min {m, 2n − 2} candidates, compared with m when testing every edge. We prove that the 2 n − 2 bound is in fact sharp. 3. Finally, we perform exhaustive experiments on graphs with two through six nodes, quan-tifying how often identification can be en-abled by expanding a directed or bidirected edge, as well as the coverage of our simple graphical conditions. In runtime compar-isons on random samples of large graphs, we observe that our algorithm provides more than a thousand-fold speedup over testing every edge in, for instance, dense graphs with 160 nodes. Discussion on related literature is available in Appendix A. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

Throughout the paper, boldface notation de-notes sets, whereas non-bold notation denotes individual elements. Capital letters denote vari-ables and small letters denote their values, value assignments, or edges of graphs. A semi-Markovian structural causal model (SCM, Shpitser and Pearl, 2006; Pearl, 2009) consists of observed variables V, latent exoge-nous variables U, and structural equations as-signing each Vi ∈ V as a function of its observed parents and a subset of U, where exogenous vari-ables are mutually independent and each may be a parent of at most two observed variables. The causal structure of a semi-Markovian SCM is represented by an acyclic directed mixed graph (ADMG, Richardson, 2003; Richardson et al., 2023) G = ( V, D, B) where V is the set of nodes, 

D is the set of directed edges and B is the set of bidirected edges. Directed edges represent pos-sible direct causal effects between members of V

and bidirected edges represent dependence in-duced by an unobserved common cause in U.For disjoint X, Y ⊂ V, the causal effect of X

on Y is described by the interventional distribu-tion p(y|do( x)), where the do-operator denotes replacing the structural equations for X by the fixed assignments X = x, while leaving all other equations unchanged. Graphically, the interven-tion removes all edges entering X.For any ADMG G, V (G) ≡ V, E(G) ≡ D ∪ B,

G ¯X,Z is the graph obtained from G by removing all incoming edges to X and all outgoing edges from Z. The set of ancestors of nodes in Y in G is denoted by An( Y)G including Y by convention. Similarly, we use Ch( Y)G to denote the children of Y in G. In addition, we denote by G−e the graph obtained from G by removing the edge e.If e / ∈ E(G), then G−e = G. A subgraph G1 of 

G2 is denoted by G1 ⊆ G 2. An edge subgraph is a graph obtained from G2 by removing zero or more edges while preserving all nodes. The induced subgraph of a set of nodes W is denoted by G[W]. For a path π, we use E(π) to denote its set of edges. Next, we define the extended graph obtained by expanding an edge. Intuitively, the new node represents variables involved in the causal or confounding relation summarized by the original edge. 

Definition 1 (Extended Graph) . Let G =(V, D, B) and let N /∈ V be a new node. Ex-panding an edge e of G produces an extended graph Ge as follows: 

• If e = ( A, V ) ∈ D, then Ge = ( V′, D′, B),where V′ = V ∪ { N } and D′ = ( D \ { e}) ∪{(A, N ), (N, V )}.

• If e = {A, V } ∈ B, then Ge = ( V′, D′, B′),

3where V′ = V ∪ { N }, D′ = D ∪{(N, A ), (N, V )} and B′ = B \ { e}.

In both extensions, the new node N has no incident bidirected edges. These extensions introduce additional causal detail without imposing new restrictions on the distribution of the original variables. Indeed, G

is the latent projection of Ge onto V. The ex-tension therefore preserves exactly the restric-tions imposed by the graph on the original ob-servational distribution p(v) (Evans, 2016, The-orem 4.13). We consider identifiability in terms of the as-sumed causal structure and the observed data distribution. 

Definition 2 (Identifiability) . Let G =(V, D, B) be a causal diagram and let X, Y ⊂

V, X ∩ Y = ∅. The causal effect p(y|do( x)) is 

identifiable from p(v) > 0 in G if p1(y|do( x)) = 

p2(y|do( x)) for every pair of causal distributions 

p1, p 2 induced by SCMs compatible with G such that p1(v) = p2(v) > 0 for all value assignments 

v to V.

In an extended graph, N denotes the new node, and identification concerns the joint dis-tribution p(v, n ) > 0 in such graphs. 

# 3 Graphical Criteria for Find-ing ID-enabling Edges 

We present some easy-to-use graphical condi-tions for determining whether an edge expan-sion can identify a previously nonidentifiable query. The identifiability or nonidentifiability of a causal effect can be quickly determined in the presence of specific graphical patterns (Tian and Pearl, 2003; Pearl, 2009). These patterns can be used to construct sufficient conditions for finding ID-enabling edges and also to determine when an edge cannot be ID-enabling. The first such con-dition is related to bidirected paths between the intervention variable and its children. 

Theorem 1. If a bidirected edge b ∈ B belongs to every bidirected path between X and any of its children in G[An( Y)G ], then p(y|do( x)) is iden-tifiable from p(v, n ) in the extended graph Gb.

In essence, Theorem 1 states that replacing a bidirected edge with its common causes will make the causal effect of interest identifiable, if the edge intercepts all bidirected paths from X

to its children. For directed edges, it suffices that only one child of X is connected to X by a bidirected path in the ancestor graph. 

Theorem 1. Suppose that only one child C of 

X in G[An( Y)G ] is connected to X via a bidi-rected path in that graph. Let d = ( X, C ). Then 

p(y|do( x)) is identifiable from p(v, n ) in the ex-tended graph Gd.

Interestingly, it is also easy to show that when-ever a directed edge expansion enables identifi-cation, it can never result in a backdoor formula. 

Theorem 1. If p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in 

G = ( V, D, B), then no set satisfies the backdoor criterion relative to X and Y in any directed edge expansion Gd, d ∈ D.

Theorems 1 and 1 describe cases in which these extensions enable identification. Next, we give a necessary condition for an edge to be ID-enabling. 

Theorem 1. Suppose that there exists a bidi-rected path π between Xi ∈ X and one of its chil-dren C in G[{Xi}∪ (An( Y)G ¯X \X)] . If p(y|do( x)) 

is identifiable in the extended graph Ge, then 

e ∈ E(π) ∪ { (Xi, C )}.

4X W YZ 

> (a)
> ZXABY
> (b)

Figure 2: Edges shown in blue are those whose expansion identifies p(y|do( x)). Theorems 1, 1, and 1 fully resolve (a), but not (b). The theorem says that whenever such bidi-rected paths between X and its children exist, we can restrict attention to those paths and the corresponding directed edges. As a corollary, if two children have such paths that share no edges, expanding one edge will always leave at least one obstruction intact. 

Corollary 1. Suppose that there exist two bidi-rected paths, π1 and π2, between X and two of its children, C1 and C2, respectively, in G[{X} ∪ 

An( Y)G ¯X ] such that E(π1) ∩ E(π2) = ∅. Then 

p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in any extended graph of G.

For example, suppose X has two children that are ancestors of Y, each connected to X by a bidirected edge. No single edge expansion can eliminate both obstructions to identification. The combination of Theorems 1, 1, and 1 pro-vides simple yet powerful graphical criteria to find and rule out ID-enabling edges. To illus-trate, consider Figure 2(a). Theorems 1 and 1 allow us to find the edges X → W , X ↔ Z, and 

Z ↔ W , while Theorem 1 rules out all the rest. In fact, in our exhaustive coverage experi-ments (Section 6.2), these criteria fully resolve 

≥ 90% of nonidentified queries across graphs of 2 to 6 nodes. In our random samples of large graphs, this number reached 92%–100% of the sampled cases. However, while powerful, these graphical conditions are not complete; Fig-ure 2(b) shows an example in which the theorems neither find nor exclude any edges. This moti-vates our developments in the following sections. 

# 4 Hedges and the ID algorithm 

The identifiability of a causal effect is related to the structure of the underlying causal graph. In particular, certain graphical structures charac-terize situations in which a causal effect cannot be identified from the observed data distribu-tion. Hedges are one such graphical structure (Shpitser and Pearl, 2006). We first introduce the notions of a forest , a C-component , and a C-forest . A forest is a graph in which each node has at most one child, and a C-component is a graph in which every pair of observed nodes is connected by a bidirected path. A graph that is both a forest and a C-component is called a C-forest. It is often useful to identify the set of nodes in a graph that have no children, which we refer to as the root set of the graph. Accordingly, a C-forest whose root set is R is called an R-rooted C-forest. We can now use these concepts to define a hedge. 

Definition 3 (Hedge) . Let G = ( V, D, B) and let X, Y ⊂ V, X ∩ Y = ∅. Let F and F′ be 

R-rooted C-forests such that X ∩ V (F)̸ = ∅, X ∩

V (F′) = ∅, F′ ⊂ F ⊆ G , and R ⊆ An( Y)G ¯X .Then the pair (F, F′) forms an R-rooted hedge for p(y|do( x)) in G.

Since the root set of F and F′ plays an impor-tant role in hedge construction, we also include the root set explicitly in the hedge definition. 5The starting point for finding ID-enabling edges is a causal graph in which the causal ef-fect of interest is not identifiable. In such a graph, nonidentifiability can be characterized both graphically through the existence of a hedge and algorithmically through the failure of the ID algorithm. In particular, Shpitser and Pearl (2006) established that a causal effect is noniden-tifiable if and only if the graph contains a hedge for the causal effect; a condition that is equiva-lent to the failure of the ID algorithm. These results were later clarified by Shpitser (2023). The main identification results are stated for-mally below. 

Theorem 5 (Shpitser (2023), Proposition 1, Condition 1) . The causal effect p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in G if and only if there exists a hedge for p(y|do( x)) in G.

Corollary 2. The causal effect p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in G if and only if the ID algorithm fails with inputs (Y, X, p (v), G).

Our method to reduce the set of potentially ID-enabling edges relies on the existence of cer-tain types of hedges in the graph. However, there is no systematic way to directly locate these hedge structures in the original graph: the ID algorithm does not return the exact hedge struc-ture upon failure, but a pair of graphs that can be used to construct the hedge. This applies both to the original formulation by Shpitser and Pearl (2006) and the modern one line formula (Richardson et al., 2023). To reduce the set of potentially ID-enabling di-rected edges, we need to identify a set of nodes that is guaranteed to form the root set of some hedge in the graph. The following lemma pro-vides such a set by showing that any hedge (F, F′) can be transformed into a hedge whose root set is V (F′). 

Lemma 1. Let H and H′ be graphs obtained from graphs F and F′, respectively, by remov-ing all outgoing edges from nodes in V (F′).If (F, F′) forms a hedge then the pair (H, H′)

forms a V (F′)-rooted hedge. 

To simplify the analysis and state the follow-ing results more straightforwardly, we first mod-ify the graph pair returned by the ID algorithm. This leads to a graphical structure that we call an ID-hedge . We next define an ID-hedge and es-tablish some useful properties of this structure. 

Definition 4 (ID-hedge) . Let (C, C′) be a graph pair returned by the ID algorithm upon failure for p(y|do( x)) in a causal diagram G and let S

and S′ be the graphs obtained from C and C′,respectively, by removing all outgoing edges from nodes in V (C′). The graph pair (S, S′) is called an ID-hedge of p(y|do( x)) in G.

Importantly, we can now state the root set of an ID-hedge. 

Lemma 1. Let (S, S′) be an ID-hedge of 

p(y|do( x)) in G. Then the root set of both S

and S′ is V (S′).

By Lemma 1, both graphs of an ID-hedge have the same root set consisting of all nodes of the smaller graph. Next, we show that an ID-hedge contains a hedge with the same root set as the ID-hedge. 

Lemma 1. For any ID-hedge (S, S′) of 

p(y|do( x)) in G, there exist edge subgraphs H ⊆ S and H′ ⊆ S ′ that form a V (S′)-rooted hedge 

(H, H′) for p(y|do( x)) in G.

An ID-hedge can be systematically con-structed from the graph pair returned by the ID algorithm upon failure and is guaranteed to contain a hedge with known root set. In the 6next section, we use these properties to deter-mine which edges can be ID-enabling. 

# 5 Algorithmic Approach to Find All ID-enabling Edges 

We use ID-hedges to characterize the edges that can be expanded to make a nonidentifi-able causal effect identifiable. Since nonidenti-fiability is characterized by the existence of a hedge, a successful extension must eliminate the relevant hedge structures responsible for non-identifiability. As ID-hedges provide systemat-ically constructible structures that are guaran-teed to contain a hedge with a known root set, we study which edges can be expanded to en-sure that no hedge with the same root set and the same two node sets remains within the ID-hedge. This leads to the notion of breaking an ID-hedge , which we define next. 

Definition 5 (Breaking an ID-hedge) . An edge 

e of G breaks a V (S′)-rooted ID-hedge (S, S′) of 

p(y|do( x)) if there are no edge subgraphs F ⊆ S−e and F′ ⊆ S′−e that form a V (S′)-rooted hedge (F, F′) for p(y|do( x)) in Ge.

Note that we consider the graphs S−e and 

S′−e instead of Se and S′

> e

. Since the new node has no bidirected path to any other node, every C-component containing it is a singleton. The larger forest of a hedge must also contain an orig-inal treatment node, so it cannot contain the new node. Since the smaller forest is a subgraph of the larger forest, it cannot contain the new node either. Breaking an ID-hedge provides a necessary condition for an edge to be ID-enabling. In par-ticular, if an edge e is ID-enabling, no V (S′)-rooted hedge consisting of exactly the same nodes as an original ID-hedge can remain in 

Ge. The following theorem formalizes this con-nection between breaking ID-hedges and ID-enabling edges. 

Theorem 1. If p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in 

G but is identifiable in Ge for some edge e of G,then e breaks every ID-hedge of p(y|do( x)) in G.

Definition 5 considers hedges for the causal ef-fect of interest in the extended graph Ge, since our interest is in identification from p(v, n ). However, we may simplify the subsequent analy-sis by considering the causal effect in the original graph G instead. The following theorem shows this equivalence. 

Theorem 1. An edge e of G breaks the V (S′)-rooted ID-hedge (S, S′) of p(y|do( x)) in G if and only if there are no edge subgraphs F ⊆ S −e and 

F′ ⊆ S ′−e that form a V (S′)-rooted hedge (F, F′)

for p(y|do( x)) in G.

Unsurprisingly, it suffices to focus our atten-tion on edges that are present in the hedges for the causal effect of interest. 

Corollary 1. Let e be an edge of G. Then 

p(y|do( x)) is identifiable in Ge if and only if e

is in every hedge for p(y|do( x)) in G.

We next characterize the individual edges that break an ID-hedge. For a directed edge, the relevant property is whether removing the edge causes its source node to lose all of its children, thereby changing the root set of the ID-hedge. For a bidirected edge, the relevant property is whether removing the edge destroys the bidi-rected connectivity required for a C-component. Characterizing edges with these properties will allow us to restrict the set of potentially ID-enabling edges. Based on these properties, we 7define two types of edges that are relevant for breaking an ID-hedge: weak directed edges and weak bidirected edges. 

Definition 6 (Weak Directed Edge) . Let I =(S, S′) be an ID-hedge of p(y|do( x)) in G. Adirected edge e = ( A, B ) of S is called a weak directed edge of I if Ch( A)S−e = ∅. The set of weak directed edges of I is denoted by Wd(I).

Definition 7 (Weak Bidirected Edge) . Let I =(S, S′) be an ID-hedge of p(y|do( x)) in G. Abidirected edge e is called a weak bidirected edge 

of I if S−e or S′−e is not bidirected-connected. The set of weak bidirected edges of I is denoted by Wb(I).

The following theorem shows that only these two types of edges can break an ID-hedge. 

Theorem 1. If an edge e breaks a V (S′)-rooted ID-hedge (S, S′) then e is either a weak directed edge or a weak bidirected edge. 

We have now developed a theoretical frame-work for reducing the set of potentially ID-enabling edges by focusing on weak directed and weak bidirected edges that can break an ID-hedge. The next step is to obtain all ID-hedges for which we leverage the ID algo-rithm. In step 4 of the standard ID algo-rithm, the graph is decomposed into its C-components and a recursive ID call is made for each component if there are at least two C-components. Since the C-components are not or-dered, there is no fixed order in which the corre-sponding recursive branches must be evaluated. Consequently, when failures occur in multiple branches, different orderings may cause different failing branches to be encountered and propa-gated first. This provides a way to obtain mul-tiple graph pairs associated with ID failures. 

Algorithm 1 Hedge-Collecting Identification Algorithm (HCID). The inputs are node sets X

and Y, representing the intervention and out-come variables, respectively, and an ADMG G.The output is a set of graph pairs obtained from encountered ID failures. The collection of node sets of the maximal C-components of G is de-noted by C(G).  

> 1:

function HCID (Y, X, G) 

> 2:

V ← V (G) 

> 3:

if X = ∅ then  

> 4:

return ∅. 

> 5:

if V ̸ = An( Y)G then  

> 6:

return HCID( Y, X ∩

An( Y)G , G[An( Y)G ]).  

> 7:

Let W = ( V \ X) \ An( Y)G ¯X . If W̸ = ∅,

return HCID( Y, X ∪ W, G).  

> 8:

if C(G[V \ X]) = {S1, . . . , Sk}, k ≥ 2

then return Ski=1 HCID( Si, V \ Si, G).  

> 9:

if C(G[V \ X]) = {S} then  

> 10:

if C(G) = {V} then  

> 11:

return {(G, G[S]) }. 

> 12:

if S ∈ C(G) then  

> 13:

return ∅. 

> 14:

if (∃S′) S ⊂ S′ ∈ C(G) then  

> 15:

return HCID( Y, X ∩ S′, G[S′]). To exploit this observation, we introduce a modified version of the ID algorithm, which we call the Hedge-Collecting Identification al-gorithm (HCID, Algorithm 1). HCID preserves the graphical recursion of the standard ID al-gorithm but modifies its failure-handling behav-ior. Whereas a failure in the standard ID algo-rithm propagates through the recursive calls and terminates the identification procedure, a failing branch in HCID returns a singleton set contain-8ing the corresponding graph pair. A branch that terminates without failure returns the empty set, and when the recursion branches into multiple C-components on line 8, HCID returns the union of the graph-pair sets obtained from the individ-ual branches. Thus, a failure in one branch does not prevent the remaining branches from being processed. As in the standard ID setting, HCID as-sumes that the observational joint distribution is known. However, HCID does not explicitly require this distribution as an input, since it does not construct the identifying functional. The parts of the standard ID algorithm con-cerned solely with constructing the identifying functional are therefore omitted. Instead, HCID records the graph pair associated with each en-countered failure condition. Consequently, if 

h failure conditions are encountered, HCID re-turns the collection P = {(G1, G′

> 1

), . . . , (Gh, G′

> h

)},

where P is empty if and only if the causal effect is identifiable in G.The construction of HCID is based on the idea that each graph pair it returns corresponds to a failure that could be encountered by the stan-dard ID algorithm under a suitable ordering of its recursive branches. We formalize this con-nection in the following theorem. This ensures that the graph pairs collected by HCID have the same interpretation as failure pairs returned by the standard ID algorithm. 

Lemma 1. For every graph pair (Ci, C′

> i

) returned by HCID, there exists an ordering of the recur-sive branches of the standard ID algorithm under which ID returns (Ci, C′

> i

) as its failure pair. 

Since every graph pair in P can also be re-turned by the standard ID algorithm under an appropriate ordering of its recursive branches, the ID-hedge construction introduced previously can be applied to each graph pair in P. Con-sequently, instead of constructing an ID-hedge from only the first failure encountered by ID, the graph pairs collected by HCID can be used to obtain multiple ID-hedges. For each resulting ID-hedge I, let Si denote the set of edges that break I. If an edge e is ID-enabling, then e must break every ID-hedge obtained from the graph pairs in P. There-fore, any such edge must satisfy e ∈ Thi=1 Si.Hence, the set C = Thi=1 Si forms a set of candi-date edges containing all potentially ID-enabling edges. Edges outside C cannot render the causal effect identifiable, since at least one of the col-lected ID-hedges would remain unbroken in the corresponding extended graph. The extended graphs corresponding to edges in C can then be tested individually for identifiability by the ID algorithm. We now formulate an algorithm for finding all ID-enabling edges as Algorithm 2. The algo-rithm collects ID-hedges with HCID and inter-sects their weak edges, yielding at most 2 n − 2candidates—and, as we show below, this bound is sharp (Theorem 1). It then tests each can-didate’s expansion with ID. Note that this is not the only possible algorithm, and that dif-ferent necessary conditions can be combined to restrict the search without affecting correctness (e.g., Theorem 1). Further necessary conditions can reduce the candidate set, while fewer condi-tions preserve correctness but may require more ID tests. Appendix G examines several variants. 

Theorem 1 (Soundness of Algorithm 2) .

Let G be a causal diagram such that 

p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in G and let 

S = ID-EnablingEdges (Y, X, G). Then 

p(y|do( x)) is identifiable in Ge for every e ∈ S.

9Algorithm 2 Algorithm for finding ID-enabling edges. The inputs are an ADMG G in which the causal effect p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable, an in-tervention set X, and an outcome set Y. The output is the set of ID-enabling edges S such that p(y|do( x)) is identifiable in Ge for all e ∈ S.

ID denotes a variation of the ID algorithm that omits the construction of the identifying func-tional analogous to HCID . 

> 1:

function ID-EnablingEdges (Y, X, G) 

> 2:

P ← HCID (Y, X, G) 

> 3:

for (Ci, C′

> i

) ∈ P do  

> 4:

Z ← V (C′

> i

) 

> 5:

(Ci, C′

> i

) ← (Ci, Z, C′

> i, Z

) 

> 6:

C ←

> |P|

\

> i=1

(Wd(Ci, C′

> i

) ∪ W b(Ci, C′

> i

))  

> 7:

S ← ∅  

> 8:

for e ∈ C do  

> 9:

if ID (Y, X, Ge) does not fail then  

> 10:

S ← S ∪ { e} 

> 11:

return S Theorem 1 (Completeness of Algorithm 2) .

Let G be a causal diagram such that p(y|do( x)) 

is not identifiable in G and let S =

ID-EnablingEdges (Y, X, G). If there exists an edge e of G such that p(y|do( x)) is identi-fiable in Ge, then e ∈ S.

We demonstrate the operation of Algorithm 2 via an example. Consider the graph G in Fig-ure 2(b) where p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable. Note that none of the conditions introduced in Section 3 reduce the number of edges to be tested. Calling HCID (Y, X, G) on line 2 pro-duces three graph pairs: (G[{Z, X, A }], G[A]), (G[{Z, X, B }], G[B]), and ( G, G[Y ]). The corre-sponding root sets are {A}, {B}, and {Y }. As each root has no children in either graph of its pair, no changes are made on line 5. Next, the set of candidates C is constructed on line 6. For the first two pairs, the common weak edges are (Z, X ) and {Z, X }. For the third pair, the weak directed edges are ( Z, X ), ( A, Y ), and ( B, Y ), and the weak bidirected edges are {Z, A } and 

{Z, B }. This reduces the set to a single directed edge C = {(Z, X )}. The ID test on line 9 de-termines that p(y|do( x)) is identifiable after ex-panding ( Z, X ), so S = C = {(Z, X )} on line 11. Appendix E illustrates the operation of Algo-rithm 2 on Figure 2(a). The computational complexity of Algorithm 2 is outlined by the following theorem. 

Theorem 1 (Complexity of Algorithm 2) . Let 

n = |V|, m = |D| + |B|, and let q be the num-ber of candidates selected by Algorithm 2. Its output S satisfies |S| ≤ q ≤ min {m, 2n − 2}.The bound 2n − 2 is sharp for both candidates and ID-enabling edges. With adjacency lists and graphical ID decisions, the algorithm runs in 

O(( q + 1) n2(n + m)) , and hence O(n3(n + m)) ,time. Processing each pair as it is returned per-mits O(n + m) working space. 

# 6 Computational experiments 

In this section, we first study how often expand-ing a single edge enables identification through exhaustive experiments on small graphs. Next, we evaluate the coverage of the graphical crite-ria of Section 3 on these graphs and as well as on random samples of larger graphs. Finally, we compare the runtime of Algorithm 2 against ex-panding and testing every edge. Details of the experiments are provided in Appendix F. 10 n Non-ID ID-enabling (%) None D B Both 2 1 0.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 3 26 7.7 15.4 7.7 69.2 4 2,010 19.3 24.2 11.3 45.2 5 513,602 32.2 29.0 11.3 27.4 6 468,747,580 44.8 31.0 9.1 15.2 

Table 1: ID-enabling edge expansions among nonidentified queries (%). D: directed only; B: bidirected only; Both: each type succeeds in a separate expansion. 

6.1 Identification via edge expansion 

We consider every case in which p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in ADMGs with two through six nodes. We consider every choice of distinct X

and Y such that all nodes are ancestors of Y , up to relabeling that preserves the treatment and outcome. These experiments cover more than 469 million nonidentified cases. Table 1 shows how often identification can be enabled by expanding a directed edge, a bidi-rected edge, either type, or neither. Expanding a single edge enables identification in 100% of cases with two nodes, 92 .3% with three, 80 .7% with four, 67 .8% with five, and 55 .2% with six. Thus, a single expansion suffices in more than half of the cases at every size considered. At six nodes, 31 .0% of cases can be solved only by expanding a directed edge, 9 .1% only by ex-panding a bidirected edge, and 15 .2% by expand-ing an edge of either type. These results illus-trate the value of considering both causal mech-anisms and sources of confounding when seeking additional observations. With two variables, successful expansions yield exactly two identification strategies: back-door and frontdoor adjustment, as depicted in Figure 1. With three variables, successful ex-pansions yield four strategies: backdoor, front-door, the Napkin (trapdoor) strategy (Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018; Helske et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2025), and a fourth strategy based on frontdoor identification of an intermediate effect—see Fig-ure 3. 

6.2 Coverage of the graphical criteria 

We evaluate how often Theorems 1, 1, and 1 fully resolve a case by determining all edges— if any—that are ID-enabling. We also mea-sure how often Theorem 1 or 1 finds an ID-enabling edge whenever one exists. We apply these theorems to the exhaustive cases and to random samples of sparse and dense graphs with 

n ∈ { 10 , 20 , 40 , 60 , 80 , 160 } nodes. Directed and bidirected edge probabilities are 4 /n and 2 /n 

for sparse graphs, and 0 .30 and 0 .20 for dense graphs. To consider different edge densities, we further examine 25 combinations of directed and bidirected edge probabilities at n = 40. In the exhaustive experiments, Theorems 1, 1, and 1 fully resolve 90–100% of cases, and The-orems 1 and 1 find an ID-enabling edge in at least 99 .96% of cases whenever a solution ex-ists. Across all settings for larger graphs, the corresponding percentages are 87 .70–100% and at least 99 .92%. Detailed results are given in Tables 3 and 5 of Appendix F. 

6.3 Runtime comparisons 

Finally, using the same samples of larger graphs, we compare the runtime of Algorithm 2 with the brute force procedure of expanding and testing every edge. For each case, speedup is the run-time of the brute force procedure divided by that of Algorithm 2. 11 Z N X Y

(a) Napkin (trapdoor)    

> XNZY

(b) Intermediate front-door 

Figure 3: Representative expanded graphs for the two additional identification strategies in 3-variable models. The newly observed variable 

N and the edges introduced by expansion are highlighted in blue. Figure 4 shows the runtime median and in-terquartile range for sparse and dense graphs. At 160 nodes, median speedups are 5 .7 for sparse graphs and 1 ,896 .0 for dense graphs. Among cases where an ID-enabling edge exists, the cor-responding speedups are 5 .7 and 1 ,348 .1. Results across the 25 combinations of edge probabilities at n = 40 are similar and defered to the ap-pendix. 

# 7 Conclusion 

We introduced a framework for determining where further investigation of a causal mech-anism or source of confounding could make a previously nonidentifiable effect identifiable in a semi-Markovian causal model. We gave sim-ple graphical conditions for finding ID-enabling edges and ruling out edges whose expansion can-not enable identification. By relating failures of the ID algorithm to ID-hedges, we charac-terized the directed and bidirected edges that can be expanded to eliminate the obstructions to identification. This characterization leads to a sound and complete algorithm that finds all ID-enabling edges. The algorithm runs final identi-20 40 60 80 160   

> Nodes
> 110 100 1,000 10 4
> Runtime per query (μs)
> ID-EnablingEdges All ancestral edges Sparse graphs Dense graphs

Figure 4: Runtime on nonidentified queries. Curves show medians and vertical bars show in-terquartile ranges over 10 ,000 queries per set-ting. fication tests on at most 2 n − 2 candidate edges, and this bound is sharp. In our experiments, the graphical conditions fully resolve most non-identified queries, and the algorithm can be more than a thousand times faster than testing every edge. Identification theory is usually used to de-cide whether a given causal model identifies the effect of interest. Our results show that it can also guide how the model should be refined, by indicating which mechanisms or sources of con-founding, once measured, would make the effect identifiable. Extending the approach to several simultaneous edge expansions is left for future work. 

# References 

Akbari, S., Etesami, J., and Kiyavash, N. (2022). Minimum cost intervention design for causal 12 effect identification. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 258–289. Akbari, S., Etesami, J., and Kiyavash, N. (2025). Optimal experiment design for causal effect identification. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26(28):1–56. Akbari, S., Jamshidi, F., Mokhtarian, E., Vow-els, M. J., Etesami, J., and Kiyavash, N. (2023). Causal effect identification in uncer-tain causal networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Chernozhukov, V., Cinelli, C., Newey, W. K., Sharma, A., and Syrgkanis, V. (2026). Long story short: Omitted variable bias in causal machine learning. The Review of Economics and Statistics , pages 1–45. Cinelli, C., Feller, A., Imbens, G., Kennedy, E., Magliacane, S., and Zubizarreta, J. (2025). Challenges in statistics: A dozen challenges in causality and causal inference. arXiv:2508.17099. Cinelli, C., Forney, A., and Pearl, J. (2024). A crash course in good and bad controls. Socio-logical Methods & Research , 53(3):1071–1104. Cinelli, C. and Hazlett, C. (2020). Making sense of sensitivity: extending omitted variable bias. 

Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 82(1):39–67. Cinelli, C. and Hazlett, C. (2025). An omitted variable bias framework for sensitivity anal-ysis of instrumental variables. Biometrika ,112(2):asaf004. Cinelli, C., Kumor, D., Chen, B., Pearl, J., and Bareinboim, E. (2019). Sensitivity analysis of linear structural causal models. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1252–1261. Elahi, S., Akbari, S., Etesami, J., Kiyavash, N., and Thiran, P. (2024). Fast proxy experiment design for causal effect identification. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 37. Evans, R. J. (2016). Graphs for margins of Bayesian networks. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics , 43(3):625–648. Guo, A., Liu, L., Benkeser, D., and Nabi, R. (2025). Causal inference with the Napkin graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19861. Ver-sion 2, revised June 2026. Guo, F. R. and Zhao, Q. (2026). Confounder selection via iterative graph expansion. The Annals of Statistics , 54(1):516–541. Helske, J., Tikka, S., and Karvanen, J. (2021). Estimation of causal effects with small data in the presence of trapdoor variables. Jour-nal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A ,184(3):1030–1051. Henckel, L., Perkovi´ c, E., and Maathuis, M. H. (2022). Graphical criteria for efficient total effect estimation via adjustment in causal lin-ear models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) ,84(2):579–599. Jeong, H., Tian, J., and Bareinboim, E. (2022). Finding and listing front-door adjustment sets. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 35. 13 Karvanen, J., Tikka, S., and Hyttinen, A. (2021). Do-search: A tool for causal inference and study design with multiple data sources. 

Epidemiology , 32(1):111–119. Kumor, D., Cinelli, C., and Bareinboim, E. (2020). Efficient identification in linear struc-tural causal models with auxiliary cutsets. In 

Proceedings of the 37th International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , volume 119 of Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 5501–5510. Maiti, A., Plecko, D., and Bareinboim, E. (2025). Counterfactual identification under monotonicity constraints. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,39(25):26841–26850. Pearl, J. (1995). Causal diagrams for empirical research. Biometrika , 82(4):669–688. Pearl, J. (2009). Causality . Cambridge Univer-sity Press. Pearl, J. and Mackenzie, D. (2018). The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect .Hachette UK. Richardson, T. (2003). Markov properties for acyclic directed mixed graphs. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics , 30(1):145–157. Richardson, T., Evans, R. J., Robins, J. M., and Shpitser, I. (2023). Nested markov properties for acyclic directed mixed graphs. The Annals of Statistics , 51(1):334–361. Robins, J. (1986). A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with a sustained exposure period—application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Mathematical Modelling , 7(9–12):1393–1512. Rosenbaum, P. R. and Rubin, D. B. (1983). The central role of the propensity score in obser-vational studies for causal effects. Biometrika ,70(1):41–55. Shpitser, I. (2023). When does the ID algorithm fail? arXiv preprint 2307.03750. Shpitser, I. and Pearl, J. (2006). Identification of joint interventional distributions in recursive semi-Markovian causal models. In Proceedings of the 21st National Conference on Artificial Intelligence – Volume 2 , pages 1219–1226. Smucler, E. and Rotnitzky, A. (2022). A note on efficient minimum cost adjustment sets in causal graphical models. Journal of Causal Inference , 10(1):174–189. Tian, J. and Pearl, J. (2002). A general iden-tification condition for causal effects. In Pro-ceedings of the 18th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 567–575. Tian, J. and Pearl, J. (2003). On the identifi-cation of causal effects. Technical report, De-partment of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles. R-290-L. van der Zander, B., Li´ skiewicz, M., and Textor, J. (2019). Separators and adjustment sets in causal graphs: Complete criteria and an al-gorithmic framework. Artificial Intelligence ,270:1–40. VanderWeele, T. J. and Robins, J. M. (2009). Properties of monotonic effects on directed acyclic graphs. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 10(24):699–718. Wang, J., Sant’Anna, P. H. C., Chernozhukov, V., and Cinelli, C. (2026). Omitted vari-14 able bias in Difference-in-Differences designs. arXiv:2609.19386. Wien¨ obst, M., van der Zander, B., and Li´ skiewicz, M. (2024). Linear-time algorithms for front-door adjustment in causal graphs. 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Ar-tificial Intelligence , 38(18):20577–20584. Zhang, C., Cinelli, C., Chen, B., and Pearl, J. (2021). Exploiting equality constraints in causal inference. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence and Statistics , volume 130 of Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1630–1638. 15 A Related literature 

Pearl’s original account of causal diagrams explicitly suggests their use in seeking additional ob-servations or experiments when an effect is not identifiable (Pearl, 1995). Within a given diagram, causal methods distinguish useful from harmful controls (Cinelli et al., 2024), characterize and enumerate valid adjustment sets (van der Zander et al., 2019), and find sets satisfying the front-door criterion (Jeong et al., 2022; Wien¨ obst et al., 2024). These methods select among variables whose causal roles are already represented in the diagram. Measurement costs and statistical efficiency can further guide the choice of an adjustment set (Smucler and Rotnitzky, 2022; Henckel et al., 2022). Karvanen et al. (2021) extend this perspective to study design, using do-search to evaluate whether proposed additional data sources would identify a causal effect under specified causal assumptions—note, however, that here the proposals are made by the researcher, instead of found and suggested by an algorithm. Guo and Zhao (2026) are somewhat related to our emphasis on iterative model specification. Their interactive procedure asks users for primary adjustment sets and uses these inputs to con-struct sufficient adjustment sets, without requiring a prespecified graph. One of the differences here is that they start with a specific strategy in mind—identification via covariate adjustment— and then proceed to try to elicit knowledge for that strategy from the researcher. Our approach, instead, starts from a partially specified causal model and then directs the researcher’s attention to where additional refinement enables identification. The question we solve and the problem scope are therefore different. For the edge expansions we consider, identification can proceed through any strategy available in non-parametric SCMs, and thus goes beyond covariate adjustment. A further connection is the use of graphical obstructions to identification to guide changes in a study or its assumptions. Hedges have been used to formulate the problem of choosing interventions for identification and to develop algorithms that minimize their cost (Akbari et al., 2022; Elahi et al., 2024; Akbari et al., 2025). Akbari et al. (2023) study minimum cost deletions of directed and bidirected edges when the causal structure is uncertain, using hedges to guide the search. These approaches seek interventions on existing variables or assumptions that remove edges. Here we use hedges to find all individual edge expansions that enable identification through additional observations, refining the mechanisms represented in the original diagram. Additional information can also change what is learned without measuring a new variable. Func-tional form restrictions, knowledge about plausible magnitudes, and equality constraints can aid identification or yield informative bounds on causal effects (VanderWeele and Robins, 2009; Cinelli et al., 2019; Cinelli and Hazlett, 2020, 2025; Kumor et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Maiti et al., 2025; Chernozhukov et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2026). Extending identification searches of the kind developed here to these other forms of knowledge is an important direction for future research. B Proofs for Section 3 (Graphical Criteria for Finding ID-enabling Edges) 

Theorem 1. If a bidirected edge b ∈ B belongs to every bidirected path between X and any of its children in G[An( Y)G ], then p(y|do( x)) is identifiable from p(v, n ) in the extended graph Gb.Proof. There are no bidirected paths between X and any of its children in Gb[An( Y)Gb ] because b

intercepts all such paths in G[An( Y)G ] and expanding b cannot create new bidirected paths between 

X and its children. Thus, p(y|do( x)) is identifiable from p(v, n ) in Gb by Theorem 4 of Tian and Pearl (2002). 

Theorem 1. Suppose that only one child C of X in G[An( Y)G ] is connected to X via a bidirected path in that graph. Let d = ( X, C ). Then p(y|do( x)) is identifiable from p(v, n ) in the extended graph Gd.Proof. Let N denote the new node in Gd. Subdividing X → C preserves directed ancestry between the original nodes. Since C ∈ An( Y)G , we have An( Y)Gd = An( Y)G ∪ { N }.

In the induced ancestor graph, the children of X in Gd are N and its original children other than C.The variable N has no incident bidirected edges. The bidirected paths between original nodes are unchanged, so none of the remaining children is connected to X by a bidirected path, by hypothesis. Thus no child of X is connected to X by a bidirected path in Gd[An( Y)Gd ]. Theorem 4 of Tian and Pearl (2002) establishes identification from p(v, n ). 

Theorem 1. If p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in G = ( V, D, B), then no set satisfies the backdoor criterion relative to X and Y in any directed edge expansion Gd, d ∈ D.Proof. Suppose Z satisfies the backdoor criterion in Gd. The case N / ∈ Z is immediate. Otherwise, let A be the parent of N , and define 

Z′ = ( Z \ { N }) ∪ { A}.

This set contains no descendants of X. Moreover, 

 Y \ Z′ ⊥⊥ X | Z′ 

> GX

.

Hence p(y|do( x)) is identifiable in G, contradicting the hypothesis. 

Theorem 1. Suppose that there exists a bidirected path π between Xi ∈ X and one of its children 

C in G[{Xi} ∪ (An( Y)G ¯X \ X)] . If p(y|do( x)) is identifiable in the extended graph Ge, then e ∈

E(π) ∪ { (Xi, C )}.

17 Proof. Suppose e / ∈ E(π) ∪ { (Xi, C )}. Then the path π and the edge Xi → C remain in Ge. Let F

consist of the nodes and bidirected edges of π together with Xi → C, and let F′ = F[V (π) \ { Xi}]. Then F and F′ are C-forests with root set V (π) \ { Xi}, Xi ∈ V (F), and X ∩ V (F′) = ∅. This root set lies in An( Y)G ¯X by assumption, and hence in An( Y)Ge, ¯X , because expanding an edge preserves directed paths between original nodes. Thus ( F, F′) is a hedge for p(y|do( x)) in Ge, and p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in Ge by Theorem 5. 

Corollary 1. Suppose that there exist two bidirected paths, π1 and π2, between X and two of its children, C1 and C2, respectively, in G[{X} ∪ An( Y)G ¯X ] such that E(π1) ∩ E(π2) = ∅. Then 

p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in any extended graph of G.Proof. By Theorem 1, any ID-enabling edge must lie in both E(π1) ∪ { (X, C 1)} and E(π2) ∪{(X, C 2)}. These sets are disjoint. 

# C Proofs for Section 4 (Hedges and the ID algorithm) 

Lemma 1. Let H and H′ be graphs obtained from graphs F and F′, respectively, by removing all outgoing edges from nodes in V (F′). If (F, F′) forms a hedge then the pair (H, H′) forms a 

V (F′)-rooted hedge. Proof. Since the pair ( F, F′) forms a hedge, it satisfies the following conditions of a hedge: 1. V (F) ∩ X̸ = ∅, V (F′) ∩ X = ∅.2. F′ ⊂ F .3. F and F′ are C-forests. 4. F and F′ have the same root set R.5. R ⊆ An( Y)G ¯X .Next, we show that these properties also hold for H and H′ with root set V (F′), which proves that (H, H′) forms a V (F′)-rooted hedge. 1. Since V (H) = V (F) and V (H′) = V (F′), we have V (H) ∩ X̸ = ∅ and V (H′) ∩ X = ∅.2. Because F′ ⊂ F and only edges common to F′ and F are removed from them to obtain H′

and H, respectively, it follows that H′ ⊂ H .3. Since only directed edges are removed from F and F′, H and H′ are C-forests. 18 4. Since F and F′ have the same root set, the root sets of H and H′ can consist only of nodes in V (F′). Since H and H′ are obtained from F and F′ by removing all outgoing edges from nodes in V (F′), the nodes in V (F′) have no children in H and H′. Therefore, the root set of both H and H′ is V (F′). 5. We have V (F′) \ R ⊆ An( R)F′ , since otherwise R could not be the root set of F′. Since 

X ∩ V (F′) = ∅, we also have F′ ⊆ G ¯X. Together, these imply that V (F′) \ R ⊆ An( R)G ¯X .Furthermore, since R ⊆ An( Y)G ¯X and V (F′) \ R ⊆ An( R)G ¯X , it follows that V (F′) \ R ⊆

An( Y)G ¯X . Finally, combining the above results with R ∪ (V (F′) \ R) = V (F′), we obtain 

V (F′) ⊆ An( Y)G ¯X .We have now shown that all properties of a hedge hold for ( H, H′) with root set V (F′). Therefore, (H, H′) forms a V (F′)-rooted hedge. 

Lemma 1. Let (S, S′) be an ID-hedge of p(y|do( x)) in G. Then the root set of both S and S′ is 

V (S′).Proof. By the hedge criterion, we can form a hedge from the edge subgraphs of C and C′ that are returned by the ID algorithm. Therefore, the root sets of C and C′ can consist only of nodes in 

V (C′). Since S and S′ are obtained from C and C′ by removing all outgoing edges of nodes in 

V (C′), the nodes in V (C′) have no children in S and S′. Thus, the root set of both S and S′ is 

V (C′) = V (S′). 

Lemma 1. For any ID-hedge (S, S′) of p(y|do( x)) in G, there exist edge subgraphs H ⊆ S and 

H′ ⊆ S ′ that form a V (S′)-rooted hedge (H, H′) for p(y|do( x)) in G.Proof. By the hedge criterion, we can find edge subgraphs F ⊆ C and F′ ⊆ C ′ that form a hedge (F, F′) for p(y|do( x)). By Lemma 1, ( H, H′) forms a V (F′)-rooted hedge, where H and H′ are obtained from F and F′, respectively, by removing all outgoing edges from nodes in V (F′). Since 

S and S′ are obtained from C and C′, respectively, by removing all outgoing edges from nodes in 

V (S′) = V (F′), it follows that H and H′ are edge subgraphs of S and S′, respectively. 

# D Proofs for Section 5 (Algorithmic Approach to Find All ID-enabling Edges) 

Theorem 1. If p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in G but is identifiable in Ge for some edge e of G,then e breaks every ID-hedge of p(y|do( x)) in G.Proof. If e does not break some ID-hedge, then, by Definition 5, there exists a hedge for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in Ge. Therefore, by Theorem 5, p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in Ge.19 Theorem 1. An edge e of G breaks the V (S′)-rooted ID-hedge (S, S′) of p(y|do( x)) in G if and only if there are no edge subgraphs F ⊆ S −e and F′ ⊆ S ′−e that form a V (S′)-rooted hedge (F, F′)

for p(y|do( x)) in G.Proof. Let F and F′ be arbitrary edge subgraphs of S−e and S′−e, respectively. Since neither F

nor F′ contains the edge e, both are subgraphs of Ge. This ensures that ( F, F′) can be considered as a potential hedge in Ge, since a hedge in a graph must itself consist of subgraphs of that graph. We consider two cases: (i) ( F, F′) forms a hedge in G, and (ii) ( F, F′) does not form a hedge in 

G. We show that in both cases the same holds in Ge, establishing the desired equivalence. (i) If ( F, F′) forms a hedge for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in G, it satisfies the following prop-erties: 1. V (F) ∩ X̸ = ∅ and V (F′) ∩ X = ∅.2. F′ ⊆ F .3. F and F′ are C-forests. 4. F and F′ have the same root set R.5. R ⊆ An( Y)G ¯X .Properties 1–4 continue to hold in Ge, since they depend only on F and F′, and neither F nor F′

contains the edge e. Therefore, expanding e does not affect these properties. It remains to show that Property 5 also holds. If e = ( A, V ), then the path A → V is replaced by A → N → V in Ge. Thus, expanding e

preserves all existing directed paths while introducing only the new node N along the replaced edge. Similarly, if e = A ↔ V , then it is replaced by N → A and N → V . This introduces two new directed edges but does not remove any existing directed edges or directed paths. Thus, in both cases, expanding e can only increase the ancestor set of Y by the node N when moving from 

G ¯X to Ge, ¯X. Hence, R ⊆ An( Y)Ge, ¯X . Thus, all properties required for ( F, F′) to form a hedge in G

continue to hold in Ge. Consequently, ( F, F′) forms a hedge for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in Ge.(ii) If ( F, F′) does not form a hedge for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in G, then at least one of Properties 1–5 does not hold. If one of Properties 1–4 does not hold in G, then it also does not hold in Ge, since expanding e does not affect these properties as shown above. If Property 5 does not hold in G, then it does not hold in Ge either. As shown above, expanding e can only add the new node N to the ancestor set of Y when moving from G ¯X to Ge, ¯X. Therefore, since R̸ ⊆ An( Y)G ¯X

and N /∈ R, we also have R̸ ⊆ An( Y)Ge, ¯X . Thus, ( F, F′) does not form a hedge for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in Ge either. Therefore, ( F, F′) forms a hedge in G if and only if it forms a hedge in Ge. Hence, the condition for breaking an ID-hedge is equivalent whether the hedge is considered in the original graph G or in the extended graph Ge, which proves the claim. 20 Corollary 1. Let e be an edge of G. Then p(y|do( x)) is identifiable in Ge if and only if e is in every hedge for p(y|do( x)) in G.Proof. Expanding e preserves ancestral relations among the original nodes, including after inter-vention on X (see the proof of Theorem 1). Moreover, N belongs to no hedge, since it has no bidirected edges and the larger forest of a hedge is a C-forest containing a treatment node and at least one other node. Hence the hedges in Ge are exactly the hedges in G that do not contain 

e, so Ge has no hedge if and only if every hedge in G contains e. The claim then follows from Theorem 5. 

Theorem 1. If an edge e breaks a V (S′)-rooted ID-hedge (S, S′) then e is either a weak directed edge or a weak bidirected edge. Proof. If e / ∈ E(S), deleting e changes neither S nor S′. The hedge supplied by Lemma 1 remains, and Theorem 1 implies that e does not break the ID-hedge. Such an edge is neither weak directed nor weak bidirected. Hence, suppose e ∈ E(S). We show that a non-weak edge cannot break the ID-hedge. We use the following notation: Ge→e′ denotes the graph obtained from G by removing the edge e and adding a new edge e′. If e / ∈ E(G), then Ge→e′ = G.Suppose first that e is a directed edge ( A, B ) but it is not a weak directed edge. By Lemma 1, we have edge subgraphs F ⊆ S and F′ ⊆ S ′ forming a V (S′)-rooted hedge ( F, F′) for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in G. Since e is not a weak directed edge, Ch( A)̸ = ∅ in S−e, and thus there exists an outgoing edge e′ from node A in S−e. Since F is a V (S′)-rooted C-forest, it contains one outgoing edge from A. If the outgoing edge of A in F is not e, then the edge subgraphs F ⊆ S −e

and F′ ⊆ S ′−e still form a V (S′)-rooted hedge ( F, F′) for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in G. If the outgoing edge of A in F is e, then edge subgraphs Fe→e′ ⊆ S −e and F′ 

> e→e′

⊆ S ′−e form a 

V (S′)-rooted hedge ( Fe→e′ , F′ 

> e→e′

) for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in G.Suppose next that e is a bidirected edge but it is not a weak bidirected edge. Lemma 1, we have edge subgraphs F ⊆ S and F′ ⊆ S ′ forming a V (S′)-rooted hedge ( F, F′) for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in G. If S−e and S′−e are bidirected-connected, we can construct edge subgraphs 

H ⊆ S −e and H′ ⊆ S ′−e. The graphs H and H′ have the same directed edges as in F and F′,respectively, and the same bidirected edges as in S−e and S′−e, respectively. Thus, ( H, H′) forms a 

V (S′)-rooted hedge for the causal effect p(y|do( x)) in G.

Lemma 1. For every graph pair (Ci, C′

> i

) returned by HCID, there exists an ordering of the recursive branches of the standard ID algorithm under which ID returns (Ci, C′

> i

) as its failure pair. Proof. Let ( Ci, C′

> i

) ∈ P be an arbitrary graph pair returned by HCID. The pair is returned when a recursive branch reaches the same failure condition as in the standard ID algorithm. Furthermore, HCID follows the same graphical recursion as the standard ID algorithm within each recursive branch. 21 The standard ID algorithm decomposes the graph into its C-components and makes a recursive call for each of them. However, the algorithm does not specify an ordering of these C-components. Therefore, whenever multiple C-components are encountered on the recursive path leading to (Ci, C′

> i

), the C-component containing the continuation of this path may be considered first. Choosing this ordering at every such branching step causes the standard ID algorithm to follow the same sequence of recursive calls as HCID along the path leading to ( Ci, C′

> i

). The recursion therefore reaches the same failure condition, and the resulting failure is propagated by the standard ID algorithm. Hence, ID returns ( Ci, C′

> i

) as its failure pair. Since i was arbitrary, the result holds for every graph pair in P.

Theorem 1 (Soundness of Algorithm 2) . Let G be a causal diagram such that p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in G and let S = ID-EnablingEdges (Y, X, G). Then p(y|do( x)) is identifiable in Ge

for every e ∈ S.Proof. The identifiability of p(y|do( x)) in Ge is verified by the ID algorithm for each member e ∈ S

on line 9. The claim now follows from the soundness of ID. 

Theorem 1 (Completeness of Algorithm 2) . Let G be a causal diagram such that p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in G and let S = ID-EnablingEdges (Y, X, G). If there exists an edge e of G such that p(y|do( x)) is identifiable in Ge, then e ∈ S.Proof. Let e be any ID-enabling edge. Since the original effect is not identifiable, HCID returns at least one pair, and every pair it collects can also be returned by ID under a suitable ordering of the branches, as shown by Lemma 1. Each corresponding pair ( Si, S′

> i

) is therefore an ID-hedge for the original effect. By Theorem 1, e must break each such ID-hedge, and by Theorem 1, 

e ∈ W d(Si, S′

> i

) ∪ W b(Si, S′

> i

) for every i. A directed edge can only belong to the directed sets and a bidirected edge can only belong to the bidirected sets. Thus e belongs to the candidate set C

in the algorithm. Completeness of ID ensures that its final test succeeds, so the algorithm returns 

e.

Theorem 1 (Complexity of Algorithm 2) . Let n = |V|, m = |D| + |B|, and let q be the number of candidates selected by Algorithm 2. Its output S satisfies |S| ≤ q ≤ min {m, 2n − 2}. The bound 

2n − 2 is sharp for both candidates and ID-enabling edges. With adjacency lists and graphical ID decisions, the algorithm runs in O(( q + 1) n2(n + m)) , and hence O(n3(n + m)) , time. Processing each pair as it is returned permits O(n + m) working space. Proof. We first bound the number of candidates. Consider any ID-hedge ( S, S′) constructed by Algorithm 2, which exists because the input query is not identifiable. By Lemma 1 and Definition 6, there are at most n − 1 weak directed edges. Similarly, by Definition 7, the weak bidirected edges cannot form a cycle, because S′ is a subgraph of S. There are therefore at most n − 1 weak bidirected edges. 22 Algorithm 2 selects a subset of these weak edges. Since its output is a subset of the candidates, 

|S| ≤ q ≤ min {m, 2n − 2}.

To prove sharpness, for n ≥ 2, consider the graph consisting of the directed chain 

Z1 → · · · → Zn−2 → X → Y

and the bidirected path 

X ↔ Z1 ↔ · · · ↔ Zn−2 ↔ Y, 

where the sequence of Z nodes is empty when n = 2. The full graph and its singleton subgraph on 

Y form a hedge, so the query p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable by Theorem 5. Every hedge for this query has root set {Y }, since An( Y )G ¯X = {X, Y } and the smaller C-forest excludes X. Its larger C-forest must therefore contain the entire bidirected path connecting X to 

Y , and the entire directed chain leading to the root Y . Thus, every edge belongs to every hedge. By Corollary 1, all 2 n − 2 edges are ID-enabling, and Theorem 1 ensures that Algorithm 2 returns them all. This establishes that the bound is sharp for both the number of candidates and the number of ID-enabling edges. We now bound the running time. HCID branches only over disjoint C-components, so it has at most n terminal branches. Each recursive call along a branch either removes nodes or adds them to the intervention set, so a branch contains O(n) calls, each taking O(n + m) time. HCID therefore runs in O(n2(n + m)) time and returns at most n graph pairs. The same bound holds for ID when the identifying functional is not constructed. We compute the candidate intersection one ID-hedge at a time. By Definitions 6 and 7, we can check whether an edge is weak in O(n + m) time. The first ID-hedge requires at most m such checks, and by the bound above, each subsequent ID-hedge requires at most 2 n − 2. Since there are at most n ID-hedges and m ≤ n(n − 1), constructing the ID-hedges and intersecting their weak edges takes O(n2(n + m)) time. By Definition 1, each extended graph has n + 1 nodes and m + 1 edges. Each of the q final ID tests therefore takes O(n2(n + m)) time. Adding these costs gives O(( q + 1) n2(n + m)). Since 

q ≤ 2n − 2, this is O(n3(n + m)). For the space bound, process the C-components one at a time and replace the current graph at each reduction. Their disjoint node sets require O(n) space. We keep the candidates that are weak edges of the current ID-hedge, then remove it from memory. The extended graphs are then tested one at a time. At any point, we need only store a constant number of graphs and the arrays used for searches, which require O(n + m) space. Since the candidate and output sets use O(n) space, the total space needed is O(n + m). 

# E Algorithm walkthrough: Figure 2(a) 

Consider the graph G in Figure 2(a) where p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable. Calling HCID (Y, X, G)on line 2 produces two graph pairs: ( G, G[Y ]) and ( G[{X, Z, W }], G[{Z, W }]). For the first pair, 23 we have Z = {Y } on line 4. As Y has no children in either graph of this pair, no changes to the graphs are made on line 5. For the second pair, we have that Z = {Z, W }, so the directed edge (Z, W ) is removed from both graphs of the pair. Next, the set of candidates C is constructed on line 6. For the first pair, X and W both only have one child in G, so the weak directed edges are ( X, W ) and ( W, Y ). All bidirected edges of G are weak, i.e., {X, Z }, {X, Y } and {Z, W },as G is no longer bidirected connected if any such edge is removed. For the second pair, the only weak directed edge is ( X, W ) and the weak bidirected edges are {X, Z } and {Z, W }. Thus 

C = {(X, W ), {X, Z }, {Z, W }} . The ID test on line 9 determines that p(y|do( x)) is identifiable in the extended graph of all three edges, so S = C in this instance on line 11. 

# F Computational experiments 

F.1 Exhaustive experiments 

We start with a set of exhaustive experiments, covering every case in which p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in ADMGs with two through six nodes. We consider every choice of distinct X and 

Y such that all nodes are ancestors of Y , up to relabeling that preserves the treatment and the outcome. For each of these cases, we run Algorithm 2 and compare the edges it returns with those found by a brute force procedure that expands each edge separately and applies ID to the resulting graph. As expected, both procedures return the same set of edges, corroborating the correctness of our algorithm. We also count the number of cases where identification can be enabled only by expanding a directed edge, only by expanding a bidirected edge, by either type, or by neither type. These results are shown in Table 2. Expanding a single edge enables identification in 100% of the cases with two nodes, 92 .3% with three, 80 .7% with four, 67 .8% with five, and 55 .2% with six. At six nodes, 31 .0% of cases can be solved only by expanding a directed edge, 9 .1% only by expanding a bidirected edge, and 15 .2% by expanding an edge of either type.                                     

> nTotal queries Nonidentified Neither Directed only Bidirected only Both 2210001340 26 24218 42,568 2,010 387 487 227 909 5581,424 513,602 165,443 149,132 58,282 140,745 6496,583,784 468,747,580 209,916,840 145,086,131 42,537,403 71,207,206

Table 2: Exhaustive classification of nonidentified queries. “Both” means that an edge of each type succeeds when expanded individually. The number of nodes n refers to the original graph. We also apply Theorems 1, 1, and 1 to the same cases, to examine the coverage of the graphical criteria developed in Section 3. We measure how often these theorems fully resolve a case by 24 determining all edges—if any—that are ID-enabling. We also measure how often Theorem 1 or 1 finds an ID-enabling edge whenever one exists. Table 3 reports the results. Theorems 1, 1, and 1 fully resolve 90–100% of the nonidentified cases, and Theorems 1 and 1 find an ID-enabling edge in at least 99 .96% of cases, whenever a solution exists. Nodes Nonidentified queries Queries admitting an expansion Fully resolved (%) Found an expansion (%) 

Exhaustive experiments 

2 1 1 100.00 100.00 3 26 24 92.31 100.00 4 2,010 1,623 90.00 100.00 5 513,602 348,159 90.70 99.97 6 468,747,580 258,830,740 92.83 99.96 

Sparse graphs 

10 10,000 7,791 94.51 [94.05, 94.94] 99.99 [99.93, 100.00] 20 10,000 8,492 93.97 [93.49, 94.42] 99.94 [99.86, 99.97] 40 10,000 9,226 95.67 [95.25, 96.05] 99.92 [99.84, 99.96] 60 10,000 9,518 96.67 [96.30, 97.00] 99.97 [99.91, 99.99] 80 10,000 9,652 97.54 [97.22, 97.83] 99.97 [99.91, 99.99] 160 10,000 9,907 99.09 [98.88, 99.26] 100.00 [99.96, 100.00] 

Dense graphs 

10 10,000 8,690 92.74 [92.21, 93.23] 99.98 [99.92, 99.99] 20 10,000 4,627 96.56 [96.18, 96.90] 100.00 [99.92, 100.00] 40 10,000 1,466 99.96 [99.90, 99.98] 100.00 [99.74, 100.00] 60 10,000 858 100.00 [99.96, 100.00] 100.00 [99.55, 100.00] 80 10,000 666 100.00 [99.96, 100.00] 100.00 [99.43, 100.00] 160 10,000 320 100.00 [99.96, 100.00] 100.00 [98.81, 100.00] Table 3: Coverage of the graphical criteria. Brackets give 95% Wilson confidence intervals. 

F.2 Sparse and dense graphs 

We draw random samples of graphs with n ∈ { 10 , 20 , 40 , 60 , 80 , 160 } nodes. For sparse graphs, each directed edge is included with probability 4 /n and each bidirected edge with probability 2 /n . For dense graphs, these probabilities are 0 .30 and 0 .20. Directed edges follow a fixed topological order, with the last node always serving as the outcome Y . The treatment X is then drawn uniformly 25 from the nodes with a directed path to Y . For each size and regime, we sample 10 ,000 graphs in which the target query p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable. Table 3 shows the coverage of the graphical criteria in Section 3. Note that Theorems 1, 1, and 1 fully resolve 92 .74–100% of the nonidentified cases. Moreover, Theorems 1 and 1 find an ID-enabling edge in at least 99 .92% of cases, whenever a solution exists. We also compare the runtime of Algorithm 2 against the naive baseline of expanding and testing every edge. For each case, we record the median runtime across seven timing batches. Speedup is the ratio of the runtime of the brute force procedure to that of Algorithm 2. The results are shown in Table 4 and Figure 4. Across graph sizes, median speedups range from 2.97 to 5 .69 for sparse graphs and from 2 .21 to 1 ,895 .97 for dense graphs. Figure 5 compares the runtimes for individual cases.                                             

> Sparse graphs Dense graphs Speedup Speedup
> nID-enabling (%) All ID-enabling ID-enabling (%) All ID-enabling 10 77.91 2.97 2.65 86.90 2.21 2.05 20 84.92 3.37 3.11 46.27 12.89 8.63 40 92.26 3.81 3.66 14.66 299.83 122.59 60 95.18 4.10 4.00 8.58 649.16 322.04 80 96.52 4.50 4.42 6.66 758.02 467.87 160 99.07 5.69 5.66 3.20 1,895.97 1,348.12

Table 4: Runtime results for sparse and dense graphs. 

F.3 Varying edge densities 

We draw random samples of graphs with n = 40 nodes. We consider all 25 combina-tions of directed edge probabilities {0.05 , 0.10 , 0.15 , 0.20 , 0.30 } and bidirected edge probabilities 

{0.02 , 0.05 , 0.10 , 0.15 , 0.20 }, using the same sampling procedure as above. For each combination, we sample 10 ,000 graphs in which the target query p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable. Two combinations are already included in the sparse and dense experiments, so we reuse those samples. Table 5 shows the coverage of the graphical criteria in Section 3. Note that Theorems 1, 1, and 1 fully resolve 87 .70–99 .96% of the nonidentified cases. Moreover, Theorems 1 and 1 find an ID-enabling edge in at least 99 .92% of cases, whenever a solution exists. We also compare the runtime of Algorithm 2 against the naive baseline of expanding and testing every edge, using the same timing procedure as above. The results are shown in Table 6. Across the 25 combinations, median speedups range from 1 .74 to 299 .83. 26 1 10 100 1,000 10 4

ID-EnablingEdges (μs) 

> 110 100 1,000 10 4
> Brute force (μs)

(a) Sparse graphs     

> 110 100 1,000 10 4

ID-EnablingEdges (μs) 

(b) Dense graphs 

> Equal runtime

Figure 5: Paired runtimes for sparse and dense graphs. Points above the diagonal favor Algorithm 2. 27 Directed edge probability Bidirected edge probability Queries admitting an expansion Fully resolved (%) Found an expansion (%) 0.05 0.02 9,981 99.00 [98.79, 99.18] 100.00 [99.96, 100.00] 0.05 0.05 9,919 97.39 [97.06, 97.68] 99.98 [99.93, 99.99] 0.05 0.10 9,770 92.83 [92.31, 93.32] 99.98 [99.93, 99.99] 0.05 0.15 9,626 89.91 [89.30, 90.49] 99.96 [99.89, 99.98] 0.05 0.20 9,509 87.70 [87.04, 88.33] 99.98 [99.92, 99.99] 0.10 0.02 9,846 99.15 [98.95, 99.31] 99.98 [99.93, 99.99] 0.10 0.05 9,226 95.67 [95.25, 96.05] 99.92 [99.84, 99.96] 0.10 0.10 7,796 91.43 [90.87, 91.96] 99.92 [99.83, 99.96] 0.10 0.15 7,286 91.43 [90.87, 91.96] 99.93 [99.84, 99.97] 0.10 0.20 7,006 92.26 [91.72, 92.77] 99.97 [99.90, 99.99] 0.15 0.02 9,582 99.43 [99.26, 99.56] 99.99 [99.94, 100.00] 0.15 0.05 7,973 96.99 [96.64, 97.31] 99.94 [99.85, 99.97] 0.15 0.10 5,596 95.82 [95.41, 96.19] 99.95 [99.84, 99.98] 0.15 0.15 4,625 96.67 [96.30, 97.00] 99.98 [99.88, 100.00] 0.15 0.20 4,366 97.90 [97.60, 98.16] 100.00 [99.91, 100.00] 0.20 0.02 9,347 99.74 [99.62, 99.82] 100.00 [99.96, 100.00] 0.20 0.05 7,102 97.64 [97.32, 97.92] 99.97 [99.90, 99.99] 0.20 0.10 3,986 97.81 [97.50, 98.08] 99.97 [99.86, 100.00] 0.20 0.15 3,027 99.01 [98.80, 99.19] 99.97 [99.81, 99.99] 0.20 0.20 2,805 99.27 [99.08, 99.42] 100.00 [99.86, 100.00] 0.30 0.02 8,975 99.91 [99.83, 99.95] 100.00 [99.96, 100.00] 0.30 0.05 5,734 98.89 [98.67, 99.08] 99.98 [99.90, 100.00] 0.30 0.10 2,524 99.50 [99.34, 99.62] 100.00 [99.85, 100.00] 0.30 0.15 1,655 99.83 [99.73, 99.89] 100.00 [99.77, 100.00] 0.30 0.20 1,466 99.96 [99.90, 99.98] 100.00 [99.74, 100.00] 

Table 5: Coverage of the graphical criteria at n = 40. Brackets give 95% Wilson confidence intervals. 28 Bidirected edge probability Directed edge probability 0.02 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.05 1.74, 1.74 1.81, 1.79 1.85, 1.82 1.88, 1.83 1.97, 1.89 0.10 4.52, 4.46 3.81, 3.66 4.80, 4.06 7.61, 5.62 12.48, 8.14 0.15 7.36, 7.08 5.75, 5.25 10.97, 8.21 27.13, 16.53 56.84, 29.96 0.20 10.40, 9.77 7.86, 6.99 20.23, 14.71 59.63, 35.20 124.44, 60.48 0.30 16.82, 15.30 13.26, 11.31 42.25, 32.07 139.00, 80.90 299.83, 122.59 

Table 6: Median paired speedups at n = 40, with 10 ,000 nonidentified queries per density com-bination. Each entry reports the median over all queries, followed by the median among queries admitting an ID-enabling expansion. 

F.4 Constructed dense graphs 

For each n ∈ { 10 , 20 , 40 , 60 , 80 , 160 }, we construct a graph with nodes Z1, . . . , Z n−2, X, Y . We include every directed edge from an earlier to a later node in the order Z1, . . . , Z n−2, X . We also include the edge X → Y and the bidirected path X ↔ Z1 ↔ · · · ↔ Zn−2 ↔ Y . The target query 

p(y|do( x)) is not identifiable in these graphs. We compare Algorithm 2 against expanding and testing every edge. The results are shown in Figure 6. Algorithm 2 performs n + 1 final ID tests, whereas the brute force procedure performs  n−12

 + n. At n = 160, for example, these counts are 161 and 12 ,721, respectively. 

F.5 Computing environment and replication 

All experiments were run on an Apple M5 Max computer with 18 CPU cores and 64 GB of memory, running macOS 27.0. The algorithms are implemented in C++17 and compiled with Apple clang 21.0 at optimization level -O3 . The experiments are run and analyzed in Python 3.12 using NumPy, PyArrow, and Matplotlib. The exhaustive and random experiments were evaluated with 12 parallel workers. Runtimes were then measured on a single thread, with no other experiments running. The complete run took approximately two hours, including correctness checks and runtime measurements, and produced 5.7 GB of saved records. 

# G Variants of Algorithm 2 

Here we generalize Algorithm 2 by allowing other constructions of the candidate set C.We compare variants of Algorithm 2 using four necessary conditions for an edge e to be ID-enabling: (i) e belongs to G[An( Y)G ]. 29 0 40 80 120 160 

Nodes    

> 02,500 5,000 7,500 10,000 12,500
> Number of ID tests
> 161 tests
> 080 160
> Nodes
> 080 160
> ID tests
> ID-EnablingEdges (zoom)
> ID-EnablingEdges Brute force

Figure 6: Number of final ID tests in the constructed dense graphs. (ii) e belongs to every larger graph Ci in the pairs returned by HCID. (iii) e is weak directed or weak bidirected in every corresponding ID-hedge. (iv) If π is a bidirected path from Xi ∈ X to a child C of Xi, and all nodes of π other than Xi lie in An( Y)G ¯X \ X, then 

e ∈ E(π) ∪ { (Xi, C )}.

These conditions follow from Corollary 1 and Theorems 1, 1, and 1, respectively. The brute force procedure uses (i) alone, while Algorithm 2 uses (i)–(iii). Table 7 compares the mean number of final ID tests for these and other combinations, including the addition of (iv). 

Algorithm 3 General form of Algorithm 2.  

> 1:

function ID-EnablingEdges (Y, X, G) 

> 2:

C ← a set of edges of G containing every ID-enabling edge  

> 3:

S ← ∅  

> 4:

for e ∈ C do  

> 5:

if ID (Y, X, Ge) does not fail then  

> 6:

S ← S ∪ { e} 

> 7:

return S 

30 Table 7 shows that Theorem 1 can be a powerful filter to complement Algorithm 2, but on its own it does not prevent a quadratic number of final ID tests in the worst case. The weak edge conditions used by Algorithm 2 guarantee at most 2 n − 2 such tests. 31 Conditions used 

n (i) (i)–(ii) (i)–(iii) (i)–(iv) (i) + (iv) |S|

Exhaustive experiments 

4 7.65 6.60 2.74 1.51 1.67 1.48 5 11.86 10.55 2.70 1.17 1.42 1.11 6 17.07 15.83 2.38 0.85 1.13 0.79 

Sparse graphs 

10 20.35 13.47 4.14 1.72 2.08 1.64 20 32.59 17.31 6.01 2.29 3.04 2.12 40 47.55 17.86 7.56 2.81 3.68 2.66 60 57.16 16.78 8.08 3.04 3.99 2.90 80 62.93 14.18 7.75 3.07 3.85 2.97 160 71.90 8.14 5.85 2.87 3.27 2.84 

Dense graphs 

10 14.76 10.00 4.06 2.02 2.38 1.91 20 63.53 58.60 3.67 0.79 1.28 0.71 40 308.15 307.70 0.48 0.15 0.15 0.15 60 755.09 755.08 0.16 0.09 0.09 0.09 80 1,403.40 1,403.40 0.11 0.07 0.07 0.07 160 5,988.83 5,988.83 0.06 0.03 0.03 0.03 

Constructed dense family 

10 46 46 11 11 46 11 20 191 191 21 21 191 21 40 781 781 41 41 781 41 60 1,771 1,771 61 61 1,771 61 80 3,161 3,161 81 81 3,161 81 160 12,721 12,721 161 161 12,721 161 

Table 7: Mean number of final ID tests per nonidentified query using different combinations of necessary conditions. The last column gives the mean number of ID-enabling edges. Constructed-family rows give exact counts for the graphs in Appendix F.4. Case (i) matches the brute force approach of testing every edge. Algorithm 2 uses (i)–(iii) (third column). 32