Title: PARTAB: Partition-Aware Reasoning with Structured Evidence for Scalable Table Understanding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.24082v1

Published Time: Wed, 26 Aug 2026 00:43:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# PARTAB: Partition-Aware Reasoning with Structured Evidence for Scalable Table Understanding 

Md Mahadi Hasan Nahid 

University of Alberta 

mnahid@ualberta.ca 

Davood Rafiei 

University of Alberta 

drafiei@ualberta.ca 

Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown strong capabilities in table reasoning, but their effectiveness degrades as tables grow in size and complexity due to irrelevant context and difficulty localizing the evidence required for reasoning. Existing approaches typically rea-son over either the full table or a single re-duced view, which can still obscure impor-tant row-column relationships. We introduce 

PARTAB (Partition-Aware Reasoning over 

Tab les), a framework that constructs a struc-tured evidence interface between the LLM and the table. PARTAB represents query-relevant evidence as semantically coherent, row-linked table regions and performs hierarchical selec-tion over column groups and row-level parti-tions before composing the selected evidence for answer generation. We evaluate PARTAB on multiple table reasoning benchmarks, cov-ering question answering, fact verification, and numerical reasoning. PARTAB consistently im-proves over full-table prompting and several re-cent table reasoning methods, achieving strong performance on WikiTableQuestions and Tab-Fact while remaining competitive on numeri-cal reasoning. Additional analyses show that semantic partitioning and targeted evidence se-lection improve evidence localization, substan-tially reduce the reasoning context, and provide larger benefits on complex tables. These results demonstrate the value of structured, partition-aware evidence construction for scalable table reasoning. 

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demon-strated strong performance on table reasoning tasks such as question answering and fact verification by operating directly over serialized tabular in-puts (Cheng et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022). However, their effectiveness degrades significantly as tables grow in size and complexity (Wang et al., 2024). This raises a central research question: how can LLMs scale to large and noisy tables while accu-rately localizing and reasoning over the relevant evidence? 

A key challenge is that, in many table reasoning tasks, the required evidence is localized to a small set of regions, consisting of specific combinations of rows and columns, while existing approaches require reasoning over the entire table (Nahid and Rafiei, 2024b). As table size increases, irrelevant content introduces noise, leading to attention dilu-tion, lost-in-the-middle effects, and incorrect row– column binding (Wang et al., 2025a). As a result, models often fail to identify the correct evidence or produce inconsistent intermediate reasoning steps, even when the necessary information is present (Li et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025). Existing approaches to LLM-based table reason-ing largely follow two paradigms. The first treats reasoning as executable program generation, most commonly through Text-to-SQL translation (Yu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2023). By delegating computation to database engines, these systems achieve strong performance on structured and aggregation-heavy queries (e.g., counting, sort-ing, and numerical comparison) (Nahid and Rafiei, 2024a). However, symbolic execution relies on constructing precise logical predicates and there-fore struggles when tables contain noisy textual de-scriptions, free-form attributes, or semi-structured content commonly observed in real-world data (Ab-hyankar et al., 2025). The second paradigm performs direct reasoning by prompting LLMs with serialized tables (Herzig et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2024). While this approach offers flexibility under ambiguity and noise, its performance degrades as table size in-creases, making it difficult for LLMs to capture row–column relationships and identify the correct cell values (Ye et al., 2023; Chen, 2023). Retrieval and pruning strategies partially mit-igate this issue by selecting subsets of rows or 1arXiv:2608.24082v1 [cs.CL] 25 Aug 2026 columns (Abhyankar et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025b), but they still require reasoning within a single monolithic view and remain vulnerable to incomplete or fragmented evidence selection (Lin et al., 2023; Nahid and Rafiei, 2024b).      

> Figure 1: Comparison of reasoning behaviors under different table reasoning paradigms. (I) Full-table prompting exposes the model to the entire table, in-creasing irrelevant context and making evidence lo-calization more difficult in long and wide tables. (II) Single-view pruning reduces context size but may re-move required evidence, leading to incomplete reason-ing and incorrect aggregation. All data shown are syn-thetic and for illustration only.

These limitations suggest that the core issue is not only what information is retrieved, but how 

reasoning is structured. We argue that table reason-ing should be reframed as a partitioned reasoning problem , where reasoning is performed over se-mantically coherent subsets of the table rather than a single global view (see Figure 1). This perspec-tive leads to three key research questions: 1 how can we provide LLMs with only the relevant evi-dences ( table parts ) of a table for a given query?  

> 2

how can we construct partitions that preserve semantic coherence and relational structure? and  

> 3

how can we select the minimal set of partitions that jointly contain sufficient evidence for correct reasoning? To address these questions, we introduce 

PARTAB (Partition-Aware Reasoning over 

Tab les) , a framework that introduces a structured evidence interface between the LLM and the table. Rather than collapsing selected evidence into a single reduced table, PARTAB constructs a query-conditioned evidence state consisting of independently addressable, row-linked table regions. The LLM then reasons over this structured state by composing evidence across the selected regions. In this way, partitioning serves not merely as a preprocessing operation for context reduction, but as an explicit mechanism for organizing and controlling table reasoning. We evaluate PARTAB on multiple challenging table reasoning benchmarks, including question an-swering and fact verification tasks. Results demon-strate consistent gains over full-table prompting and pruning-based baselines, outperforming sev-eral recent methods, particularly on large and noisy tables. Further analysis demonstrate that partition-aware reasoning improves evidence localization and yields more interpretable intermediate reason-ing traces. Our contributions are threefold. 1 We in-troduce PARTAB , which constructs a query-conditioned structured evidence state consisting of semantically organized, independently addressable, and row-linked table regions. 2 We introduce a modular pipeline that combines semantic grouping, group selection, and row-linked part selection to improve alignment and reduce noise during rea-soning. 3 We demonstrate that the benefits of partition-aware reasoning increase with table size and structural complexity, supporting its use as a scalable reasoning interface for large and noisy ta-bles. 

2 Methodology 

We implement PARTAB as a modular partition-aware reasoning pipeline for table question answer-ing (see Figure 2 ). Given a question q and a table 

T , the system produces an answer a through four stages: (1) Question Analyzer , (2) Partition Builder ,(3) Group and Part Selector , (4) Answer Executor .The key idea is to replace single-view reasoning over the entire table with localized reasoning over structured table parts . For example, a question about “the highest population city” should only involve the columns related to city and population, and a small subset of relevant rows, rather than the full table. Algorithm 1 summarizes the pipeline. 2Figure 2: Overview of PARTAB. Given a question and table, PARTAB constructs semantically coherent table partitions and performs localized understanding over selected partitions enabling reliable reasoning over large and noisy tables. All data shown are synthetic and for illustration only .

Algorithm 1 PARTAB: Partition-Aware Table Rea-soning                                             

> Require: Question qand table T
> Ensure: Predicted answer a
> 1: zq←ANALYZE (q)
> 2: Π( T)←BUILD PARTITIONS (T, q )
> 3: Gq←SELECT GROUPS (q, z q,Π( T))
> 4: Pq←SELECT PARTS (q, G q,Π( T))
> 5: if Pq=N ull then
> 6: Pq←BASIC SELECT (Gq,Π( T))
> 7: end if
> 8: a←EXECUTE (q, Pq)
> 9: return a

2.1 Table Preprocessing 

We first normalize the input table to ensure con-sistent schema representation. Column names are cleaned by lowercasing, removing or replacing spe-cial characters (e.g., replacing whitespace with un-derscores), and standardizing formatting. We then insert a row_id column when absent: 

T ′ = EnsureRowID (CleanColumns (T )) .

The row_id serves as a stable key for linking information across partitions in later stages. 

2.2 Question Analyzer 

In this stage, we aim to identify the reasoning struc-ture of the question to guide downstream partition-ing and selection. Given a question q, an LLM-based analyzer produces a structured representa-tion: 

zq = Analyze (q),

which encodes attributes such as question type (lookup, aggregation, comparison, etc.), required data processing operations (filtering, sorting, aggre-gation), and expected answer type. The intuition is that different questions require different table regions. For example, an aggre-gation query focuses on filtered rows that should not be part of the aggregation, while a comparison query requires multiple candidate rows. The ana-lyzer provides lightweight signals that guide both partition selection and reasoning. 

2.3 Partition Builder 

This stage decomposes the table into semanti-cally coherent parts to enable localized reasoning. Rather than operating on a single serialized table, PARTAB constructs multiple structured views by partitioning both columns and rows. 

Semantic Column Grouping. Columns are grouped into semantically coherent sets: 

G = {g1, g 2, . . . , g m}.

Each non-key column must belong to exactly one group, while row_id acts as a universal key. Every column that is not assigned by the mode is placed into a fallback other group. For example, in a table of countries, columns such as population ,

area , and gdp may form a “statistics” group, while 

name and region form a “metadata” group. 3Chunked Part Construction. Each semantic group gi is further partitioned along the row dimen-sion into fixed-size chunks of size c, where each chunk is identified by the corresponding range of 

row_id s. Formally, 

Pi,j = T ′[rj:j+c−1, {row_id } ∪ gi],

where i indexes the semantic group and j indexes the row chunk. Each part is stored together with its associated metadata, including the group name, row range, column set, and the corresponding data content. In our implementation, we use a default chunk size of c = 5 . This stage creates multiple localized views of the table. Unlike pruning, which produces a single reduced table, PARTAB produces a set of complementary parts , enabling flexible evidence composition. 

2.4 Group and Part Selector 

This stage identifies the minimal set of table regions required for answering the question. 

Group Selection. We first select relevant column groups: 

Gq ⊆ G. 

The selector is implemented as an LLM mod-ule that receives: (1) the question, (2) the question analysis output, and (3) the list of available column groups. It is instructed to select only the groups necessary for answering the question. This step reduces the search space before fine-grained part selection and acts as a schema-level routing mech-anism. For example, a population-related query should ignore groups such as timestamps or de-scriptions. 

Part Selection. We then select specific row chunks within the chosen groups: 

Πq(T ) = {P ∈ Π( T ) | group (P ) ∈ Gq}.

We consider three selection strategies: 

Basic Selection. This mode selects all candidate parts: 

Pq = Π q(T ),

and it serves as the simplest partition-aware base-line. 

Similarity-Based Selection. This strategy ranks parts using TF–IDF similarity with the question and select top-k:

Pq = TopK TF-IDF (q, Πq(T )) .

LLM-Based Selection. In this mode, an LLM is used to directly predict the minimal set of relevant parts. This stage ensures that reasoning operates over a 

focused yet sufficient subset of the table, reducing noise while preserving necessary evidence. 

2.5 Answer Executor 

This stage performs reasoning over selected parts to produce the final answer. Here selected parts are serialized into a compact context: 

Cq = Serialize (Pq).a = Execute (q, C q).

Each part is rendered with metadata (group, row range, columns) and a preview of rows. The prompt explicitly instructs the model to answer using only the provided table parts, treat row_id as the linking key across parts, avoid relying on outside knowl-edge, and return only a short final answer. If the an-swer cannot be determined from the selected parts, the model is instructed to return a fixed abstention response. 

3 Evaluation and Experimental Setup 

Datasets. We evaluate PARTAB on three bench-marks covering both table question answering and fact verification tasks. WikiTableQuestions (Pa-supat and Liang, 2015) evaluates compositional reasoning over Wikipedia tables, and we report Exact Match (EM) accuracy following standard protocols. TabFact (Chen et al., 2020) focuses on table-based fact verification, where the task is to determine whether a statement is entailed or re-futed by a table; we report classification accuracy (Acc). TableBench (Wu et al., 2025) evaluates rea-soning over large and complex tables and includes two subsets: Numerical Reasoning (NR) and Fact Checking (FC) . We report Exact Match (EM) for both NR and FC tasks. 

Implementation. We adopt a modular design in PARTAB, where different components are in-stantiated with models suited to their functional roles. We use the lightweight and cost-efficient 

GPT-5-nano for partition construction to limit in-ference cost, and GPT-4o-mini for answer execu-tion to enable fair comparison with prior work to demonstrate the effect of partition-aware rea-soning. To assess robustness across model fam-ilies, we evaluate our method using two further 4Method WikiTableQuestions TabFact TableBench EM Acc NR (EM) FC (EM) BINDER (Cheng et al., 2023) 38.03 67.50 - -DATER (Ye et al., 2023) 52.00 74.70 - -ReAcTable (Zhang et al., 2024b) 57.09 - - -End-to-End Prompting 59.43 73.22 59.50 66.66 Chain-of-Thought (CoT) 64.31 75.99 - -Chain-of-Table (Wang et al., 2024) 68.53 85.09 - -TabSQLify (Nahid and Rafiei, 2024b) 68.74 78.30 66.25 70.83 Rank_Agent (Wu et al., 2025) - - 78.34 87.50                 

> PoTable (Mao et al., 2026) 64.73 88.93 --H-Star (Abhyankar et al., 2025) 74.93 89.42 69.52 79.17 TableMaster (Cao and Liu, 2026) 78.13 90.12 --
> PARTAB (Ours) 79.31 90.48 70.33 82.71

Table 1: Downstream performance on table reasoning benchmarks. PARTAB achieves strong results across question answering, fact verification, and numerical reasoning, outperforming several recent baselines on WikiTableQuestions and TabFact while remaining competitive on TableBench. 

LLM backbones, Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite and 

DeepSeek-v4-Flash . All answer-generation ex-periments use zero-shot prompting with concise in-structions, without few-shot demonstrations, chain-of-thought, or program-of-thought prompting. De-tailed prompts and illustrative examples are pro-vided in Appendix F .The default configuration sets the row chunk size to c = 5 and uses top-k = 6 for similarity-based retrieval, where similarity is computed using a basic TF-IDF representation. 1

4 Results and Discussion 

We analyze PARTAB through three empirical ques-tions: 1 whether gains come from structured evi-dence construction rather than additional inference budget; 2 the contribution of semantic partition-ing and hierarchical selection; and 3 how the benefit of partition-aware reasoning changes with table complexity. 

Downstream Results. Table 1 shows that PARTAB performs strongly across diverse table reasoning tasks. It achieves the best result on WikiTableQuestions (79.31 EM), surpassing Table-Master (78.13) and earlier methods, and reaches 90.48 accuracy on TabFact, indicating effective evidence localization and semantic grounding. On TableBench, PARTAB remains competitive with 70.33 EM on numerical reasoning and 82.71 accuracy on fact checking. Although special-ized systems such as Rank_Agent perform bet-ter on aggregation-heavy tasks, PARTAB achieves 

> 1We will release the code and data upon acceptance of the paper.

strong results without full-table execution. Overall, PARTAB provides a balanced and robust approach across semantic and numerical reasoning by im-proving accuracy through localized reasoning over partitioned table regions. 90.0 92.5 95.0 97.5 100.0   

> 96%
> Semantic Column-Grouping Quality
> Coherent Partially coherent Incoherent 0246
> 3% 1%
> Percentage of Tables (%)

Figure 3: Partition construction performance. Manual evaluation of semantic column-grouping quality over 100 tables.The generated groups are fully coherent in 96% of the evaluated cases. 

Partition Construction Performance. We eval-uate the quality of partition construction by as-sessing the semantic coherence of the generated column groups. Since column grouping is pro-duced by an LLM without a unique ground-truth decomposition, we conduct a manual evaluation to determine whether the induced groups align with meaningful semantic structures in the table. As shown in Figure 3, 96% of the groups are fully coherent, indicating that the model reliably cap-tures high-level schema structure. The remaining 4% of errors mainly involve semantically related columns being separated or unrelated columns be-ing grouped together. Overall, these results show that PARTAB constructs robust and meaningful 52 groups 3 groups 4 groups 5+ groups 010 20 30 40 50 60 

> Percentage of Tables (%)
> 18.1 54.9 22.7 4.3 17.2 52.5 26.4 3.9 14.0 47.6 31.5 6.8
> Distribution of Semantic Column Groups
> WikiTQ TabFact TableBench

Figure 4: Distribution of the number of semantic column groups generated per table. Most tables are decomposed into three or four groups across all evaluated datasets. 

partitions for downstream reasoning.                 

> Selection Strategy WikiTQ TabFact TableBench EM Acc NR (EM) FC (EM) Basic Selection 74.71 87.88 64.43 79.26 Similarity-based Selection 67.25 85.87 58.69 59.25 LLM-based Selection 79.31 90.48 70.33 82.71

Table 2: Comparison of part-selection strategies across table reasoning benchmarks. The best result in each column is shown in bold. 

Partition Selection Performance. Table 2 shows that effective part selection is critical for partition-aware reasoning. LLM-based selection achieves the best performance across all benchmarks, in-cluding WikiTableQuestions (79.31 EM), TabFact (90.48 Acc), and TableBench (70.33 / 82.71), demonstrating the importance of semantic under-standing in identifying minimal yet sufficient parti-tions. In contrast, similarity-based selection performs the worst, indicating that surface-level similarity is insufficient for capturing true relevance, particu-larly for compositional queries. Basic selection per-forms better but still includes unnecessary context, which can reduce reasoning precision compared to more targeted selection. 

Distribution of Semantic Column Groups. The Column Grouping prompt provides a soft prefer-ence for constructing between two and five seman-tic groups. This is not a hard constraint; the model may produce additional groups when required by a more complex schema. Figure 4 shows that most tables are represented by three or four semantic groups. For WikiTQ, 77.6% of tables contain three or four groups; the corresponding proportions are 78.9% for TabFact and 79.1% for TableBench. Six groups are gener-ated in at most 0.2% of examples. These results indicate that the grouping proce-dure produces compact and interpretable schema organizations rather than excessively fragmenting thetable. At the same time, the model retains the ability to generate more fine-grained groupings for unusually wide or semantically diverse schemas.                   

> LLM Backbone WikiTQ TabFact TableBench EM Acc NR (EM) FC (EM)
> GPT-4o-mini 79.31 90.48 70.33 82.71
> Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite 71.23 83.56 61.29 64.53
> DeepSeek-v4-Flash 78.30 91.70 70.23 75.34

Table 3: Performance of PARTAB across different answer-execution backbones. 

Robustness Across LLM Backbones. We evalu-ate PARTAB using three answer-execution back-bones with different capabilities and model fam-ilies. Table 3 shows that the framework remains effective across all three models. DeepSeek-v4-Flash closely matches GPT-4o-mini on WikiTQ and TableBench-NR and obtains the highest Tab-Fact accuracy. Although Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite produces lower absolute performance, it remains capable of following the same partition-aware rea-soning pipeline. These results indicate that PARTAB is not tied to a single proprietary model. Nevertheless, the performance variation across backbones shows that final accuracy still depends on the executor’s abil-ity to follow structured instructions, maintain row– column alignment, perform numerical operations, and reason faithfully over selected table parts. 

Frontier Models on Large and Complex Tables. 

To examine whether partition-aware reasoning re-mains useful when the executor has stronger rea-soning capabilities and a larger context window, we construct a hard subset for each benchmark. An example is included in the hard subset when its table contains more than 45 rows or more than 10 columns. These examples are particularly challeng-ing due to attention dilution, increased irrelevant context, and greater difficulty in evidence localiza-tion. Table 4 compares PARTAB with full-table prompting using the same backbone. PARTAB improves performance for every backbone–dataset combination. The average improvement is +18 .96 

points for GPT-4o-mini, +9 .03 points for GPT-5-mini, and +12 .65 points for DeepSeek-v4-Pro. The largest improvements are observed on TabFact-Hard, where PARTAB improves accuracy 6LLM Backbone Method WikiTQ-Hard TabFact-Hard TB-NR-Hard EM ∆ EM ∆ EM ∆                                       

> GPT-4o-mini Full Table 45.80 –55.32 –40.47 –PARTAB (Ours) 55.72 +9.92 80.85 +25.53 61.90 +21.43
> GPT-5-mini Full Table 60.30 –57.14 –57.45 –PARTAB (Ours) 61.83 +1.53 78.26 +21.12 61.90 +4.45
> DeepSeek-v4-Pro Full Table 58.01 –55.32 –54.76 –PARTAB (Ours) 59.54 +1.53 89.36 +34.04 57.14 +2.38

Table 4: Performance of full-table prompting and PARTAB on hard subsets containing large or wide tables. WikiTQ-Hard and TB-NR-Hard are evaluated using Exact Match (EM), while TabFact-Hard is evaluated using accuracy. Each ∆ denotes the absolute improvement of PARTAB over full-table prompting with the same backbone. 

by 25 .53 , 21 .12 , and 34 .04 points for GPT-4o-mini, GPT-5-mini, and DeepSeek-v4-Pro, respectively. The gains on WikiTQ-Hard and TableBench-NR-Hard become smaller for stronger models, suggest-ing that frontier models can partially compensate for long-context difficulty on some compositional and numerical questions. However, the consistent improvements show that stronger reasoning capa-bilities and larger context windows do not fully eliminate challenges in evidence localization and reasoning over large tables. 

Partition Structure and Context Reduction. 

We analyze the structures generated by the Par-tition Builder across the three evaluation datasets. Table 5 reports the average number of semantic column groups, columns per group, candidate par-titions, and selected partitions. Across datasets, each table is decomposed into approximately 3.1–3.3 semantic groups, with roughly two non-key columns in each group. Al-though partition construction creates between 9.84 and 17.56 candidate parts per table, the selector retains only 2.44–3.88 parts on average. Relative to the candidate partition set, this corre-sponds to a reduction of 77.9% on WikiTQ, 75.2% on TabFact, and 75.2% on TableBench. Therefore, PARTAB exposes the final answer executor to only a small fraction of the available table regions.                   

> Dataset Partition Construction Partition Selection Groups / Table Columns / Group Parts / Table Selected Parts Reduction (%) WikiTQ 3.13 2.10 17.56 3.88 77.9 TabFact 3.17 2.11 9.84 2.44 75.2 TableBench 3.32 2.31 12.27 3.04 75.2

Table 5: Statistics of partition construction and selection. Reduction is computed as 1 − selected parts candidate parts .

Component-Level Ablations. We conduct component-level ablations on WikiTQ to isolate the contribution of the Question Analyzer, se-mantic column grouping, and joint row–column partitioning. The results are shown in Table 6.           

> Configuration WikiTQ EM ∆
> Full PARTAB 79.31 –PARTAB w/o Question Analyzer 72.21 −7.10
> PARTAB with Random Column Grouping 68.84 −10 .47
> PARTAB with Row Chunking Only 57.19 −22 .12

Table 6: Component-level ablation results on WikiTQ. Each ∆ denotes the absolute change in exact match relative to the full PARTAB configuration. 

Removing the Question Analyzer decreases ex-act match by 7.10 points, showing that the struc-tured question representation improves schema-level routing and partition selection. Replacing se-mantic column groups with randomly constructed groups reduces performance by 10 .47 points, di-rectly demonstrating that semantic coherence is important rather than grouping alone. Construction  

> 12%
> Part selection
> 46%
> Reasoning 28%
> Aggregation
> 14%
> Failure Analysis

Figure 5: Distribution of failure types based on 100 incorrect predictions. Part-selection errors constitute the largest source of failure. 

The largest degradation occurs when PARTAB uses row chunking without semantic column group-ing, resulting in a 22 .12 -point reduction. This re-sult indicates that row segmentation alone does not provide the structured evidence organization required for reliable table reasoning. Instead, the performance gains arise from jointly localizing rel-7evant rows and semantically related columns. 

Error Analysis. We manually analyze 100 incor-rect predictions and categorize the failures into four types (Figure 5). Part-selection errors are the most common (46%), occurring when relevant partitions are missed or row coverage is insufficient, indicat-ing that evidence localization remains the main bot-tleneck. Reasoning errors account for 28%, where sufficient evidence is present but the executor fails in comparison, inference, or computation. Aggre-gation errors represent 14% and mainly arise from questions requiring near-global row coverage. Con-struction errors are least frequent (12%), consistent with the high semantic coherence of the generated column groups and suggesting that partition con-struction is more reliable than downstream selec-tion. We provide additional experimental results, and analysis in the Appendix A and B.

5 Related Work 

LLM-based Table Reasoning. Large language models (LLMs) have enabled strong progress in table question answering and fact verification (Cao and Liu, 2026; Zhou et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2025; Fang et al., 2024). Early models such as TAPAS (Herzig et al., 2020) and TAPEX (Liu et al., 2022) demonstrated the effectiveness of pretrain-ing for tabular reasoning, while recent prompting-based approaches improve flexibility but struggle with long tables due to attention limitations and in-complete evidence utilization (Tyagi et al., 2025). 

Text-to-SQL and Symbolic Reasoning. An-other line of work formulates table reasoning as Text-to-SQL generation (Yu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2023), enabling reliable aggregation through exe-cutable queries. While effective for structured data, these approaches rely on precise predicate con-struction and often fail under noisy textual condi-tions (Wang et al., 2025c; Evkarpidi and Tutubalina, 2025). 

Decomposition and Retrieval. To address scal-ability, prior work decomposes tables or retrieves relevant substructures. Methods such as Tab-SQLify (Nahid and Rafiei, 2024b), TabSD (Wang et al., 2025b), and Tree-of-Table (Ji et al., 2025) reduce reasoning complexity through structured de-composition. Recent approaches further explore sub-table retrieval and structured reasoning, includ-ing ITR (Lin et al., 2023), PieTa (Lee et al., 2025), RoT (Zhang et al., 2025b), and CABINET (Pat-naik et al., 2024). Long-context benchmarks high-light persistent performance degradation as table size increases (Li et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a; Wu et al., 2025). Recent retrieval-augmented ap-proaches such as TableRAG (Chen et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2025) improve scalability by retrieving rel-evant table content, but do not explicitly structure reasoning within tables. 

Hybrid and Tool-Augmented Reasoning. Hy-brid frameworks combine LLM reasoning with ex-ternal tools such as SQL or programs. Representa-tive approaches include ReAcTable (Zhang et al., 2024b), Weaver (Khoja et al., 2025), E 5 (Zhang et al., 2024c), TIDE (Yang et al., 2025), and TABDSR (Jiang et al., 2025), as well as broader neuro-symbolic systems (Zhang et al., 2024a; Cheng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025a; Ye et al., 2023; Abhyankar et al., 2025). These methods im-prove numerical reasoning and interpretability but often depend on execution pipelines or structured representations. Existing approaches typically rely on full-table reasoning, single-view decomposition or retrieval, or symbolic execution, each involving trade-offs among flexibility, scalability, and evidence com-pleteness. PARTAB instead constructs a structured evidence interface in which query-relevant infor-mation is organized into semantically coherent, row-linked table regions. By combining seman-tic grouping with hierarchical partition selection and cross-region evidence composition, PARTAB enables localized reasoning while preserving the re-lational structure needed to connect evidence across the table. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduced PARTAB , a partition-aware frame-work that constructs a structured evidence interface between LLMs and tables. PARTAB organizes query-relevant evidence into semantically coher-ent, row-linked regions and composes the selected regions for reasoning rather than relying on a full table or single reduced view. Experiments across multiple table reasoning benchmarks show strong performance, improved evidence localization, and substantial context reduction, with larger benefits on complex tables. These results demonstrate that structured, partition-aware evidence construction provides an effective reasoning interface for scal-able table understanding. 8Limitations 

PARTAB focuses on inference-time reasoning over tables, with particular emphasis on settings where the evidence required for a query is localized to a subset of rows and columns. The framework is designed to improve evidence localization and structured reasoning over large and noisy tables, rather than to replace symbolic execution for ex-haustive aggregation or to address broader settings such as complex multi-table operations, temporal reasoning, or database-scale query processing. Despite its effectiveness, PARTAB has several limitations. First, it relies on LLM-based com-ponents for question analysis, grouping, and se-lection, making it sensitive to prompt design and model variability, with errors potentially propa-gating across stages. Second, PARTAB does not explicitly enforce global completeness for aggre-gation tasks, which can lead to missing evidence when full-table coverage is required. Third, the current heuristic partitioning strategy (fixed chunk size and LLM-based grouping) may not generalize optimally across diverse table structures. Finally, although each step operates on reduced context, the multi-stage pipeline can introduce additional latency compared to single-pass prompting. Future work includes integrating symbolic ex-ecution for reliable aggregation, improving part selection through learned or hybrid retrieval mech-anisms, and extending PARTAB to more complex settings such as multi-table reasoning and temporal queries. 

Ethics Statement 

PARTAB is a general-purpose framework for table reasoning and does not introduce or collect sensi-tive user data. However, like other LLM-based rea-soning systems, it may produce incorrect answers when relevant evidence is omitted or downstream reasoning fails. Such errors could be consequential if the system were applied without verification in high-stakes domains. PARTAB also requires mul-tiple LLM inference calls, introducing additional computational cost relative to single-pass prompt-ing, although our experiments show substantially lower token usage than several multi-stage base-lines. We therefore view PARTAB primarily as a research framework and recommend appropriate validation and human oversight for consequential applications. 

References 

Nikhil Abhyankar, Vivek Gupta, Dan Roth, and Chan-dan K. Reddy. 2025. H-STAR: LLM-driven hybrid SQL-text adaptive reasoning on tables. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8841–8863, Al-buquerque, New Mexico. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Lang Cao and Hanbing Liu. 2026. Tablemaster: A recipe to advance table understanding with language models. Preprint , arXiv:2501.19378. Si-An Chen, Lesly Miculicich, Julian Martin Eisen-schlos, Zifeng Wang, Zilong Wang, Yanfei Chen, Yasuhisa Fujii, Hsuan-Tien Lin, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. 2024. TableRAG: Million-token table understanding with language models. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Wenhu Chen. 2023. Large language models are few(1)-shot table reasoners. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023 ,pages 1120–1130, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Wenhu Chen, Hongmin Wang, Jianshu Chen, Yunkai Zhang, Hong Wang, Shiyang Li, Xiyou Zhou, and William Yang Wang. 2020. Tabfact : A large-scale dataset for table-based fact verification. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Zhoujun Cheng, Tianyang Jiang, Qianhui Zhang, and Lei Li. 2023. Binding language models in symbolic languages for table question answering. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Nikolas Evkarpidi and Elena Tutubalina. 2025. Bridg-ing the gap between open-source and proprietary large language models in table question answering. Xi Fang, Weijie Xu, Fiona Anting Tan, Jiani Zhang, Ziqing Hu, Yanjun Qi, Scott Nickleach, Diego Socol-insky, Srinivasan Sengamedu, and Christos Faloutsos. 2024. Large language models on tabular data: Pre-diction, generation, and understanding. ACM Com-puting Surveys .Jonathan Herzig, Pawel Krzysztof Nowak, Thomas Müller, Francesco Piccinno, and Julian Eisenschlos. 2020. Tapas: Weakly supervised table parsing via pre-training. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,page 4320–4333. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Deyi Ji, Lanyun Zhu, Siqi Gao, Peng Xu, Hongtao Lu, Jieping Ye, and Feng Zhao. 2025. Tree-of-table: Un-leashing the power of llms for enhanced large-scale table understanding. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .

9Changjiang Jiang, Fengchang Yu, Haihua Chen, Wei Lu, and Jin Zeng. 2025. TabDSR: Decompose, sani-tize, and reason for complex numerical reasoning in tabular data. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 3172– 3196, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rohit Khoja, Devanshu Gupta, Yanjie Fu, Dan Roth, and Vivek Gupta. 2025. Weaver: Interweaving SQL and LLM for table reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 28282–28308, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Wonjin Lee, Kyumin Kim, Sungjae Lee, Jihun Lee, and Kwang In Kim. 2025. Piece of table: A divide-and-conquer approach for selecting subtables in table question answering. Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, Xuanhe Zhou, Chenhao Ma, Guoliang Li, Kevin C.C. Chang, Fei Huang, Reynold Cheng, and Yongbin Li. 2023. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Liyao Li, Jiaming Tian, Hao Chen, Wentao Ye, Chao Ye, Haobo Wang, Ningtao Wang, Xing Fu, Gang Chen, and Junbo Zhao. 2025. LongTableBench: Benchmarking long-context table reasoning across real-world formats and domains. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 11927–11965, Suzhou, China. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Weizhe Lin, Rexhina Blloshmi, Bill Byrne, Adria de Gispert, and Gonzalo Iglesias. 2023. An inner table retriever for robust table question answering. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9909–9926, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qian Liu, Bei Chen, Jiaqi Guo, Zhenhua Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Dongmei Zhang. 2022. Tapex: Ta-ble pre-training via learning a neural sql executor. In 

International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR) .Weizheng Lu, Jing Zhang, Ju Fan, Zihao Fu, Yueguo Chen, and Xiaoyong Du. 2025. Large language mod-els for table processing: A survey. Frontiers of Com-puter Science , 19(2). Qingyang Mao, Qi Liu, Zhi Li, Mingyue Cheng, Zheng Zhang, and Rui Li. 2026. Potable: Towards system-atic thinking via plan-then-execute stage reasoning on tables. Preprint , arXiv:2412.04272. Md Mahadi Hasan Nahid and Davood Rafiei. 2024a. NormTab: Improving symbolic reasoning in LLMs through tabular data normalization. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 3569–3585, Miami, Florida, USA. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Md Mahadi Hasan Nahid and Davood Rafiei. 2024b. TabSQLify: Enhancing reasoning capabilities of LLMs through table decomposition. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5725–5737, Mexico City, Mexico. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Md Mahadi Hasan Nahid and Davood Rafiei. 2025. Prism: Agentic retrieval with llms for multi-hop ques-tion answering. Md Mahadi Hasan Nahid, Davood Rafiei, Weiwei Zhang, and Yong Zhang. 2026. Rethinking schema linking: A context-aware bidirectional retrieval ap-proach for text-to-SQL. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2026 ,pages 4516–4546, Rabat, Morocco. Association for Computational Linguistics. Panupong Pasupat and Percy Liang. 2015. Composi-tional semantic parsing on semi-structured tables. In 

Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1470– 1480, Beijing, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Sohan Patnaik, Heril Changwal, Milan Aggarwal, Sumit Bhatia, Yaman Kumar, and Balaji Krishnamurthy. 2024. CABINET: Content relevance-based noise re-duction for table question answering. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Rishit Tyagi, Mohit Gupta, and Rahul Bouri. 2025. Agentic large language models for question answer-ing over tabular data. Lanrui Wang, Mingyu Zheng, Hongyin Tang, Zheng Lin, Yanan Cao, Jingang Wang, Xunliang Cai, and Weiping Wang. 2025a. Needleinatable: Exploring long-context capability of large language models to-wards long-structured tables. In 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) .Yuxiang Wang, Junhao Gan, and Jianzhong Qi. 2025b. Tabsd: Sql-based table decomposition for free-form table question answering. Zhongyuan Wang, Richong Zhang, Zhijie Nie, and Hangyu Mao. 2025c. General table question answer-ing via answer-formula joint generation. Zilong Wang, Hao Zhang, Chun-Liang Li, Julian Martin Eisenschlos, Vincent Perot, Zifeng Wang, Lesly Mi-culicich, Yasuhisa Fujii, Jingbo Shang, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. 2024. Chain-of-table: Evolving 

10 tables in the reasoning chain for table understanding. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Xianjie Wu, Jian Yang, Linzheng Chai, Ge Zhang, Ji-aheng Liu, Xeron Du, Di Liang, Daixin Shu, Xi-anfu Cheng, Tianzhen Sun, and 1 others. 2025. Tablebench: A comprehensive and complex bench-mark for table question answering. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 39, pages 25497–25506. Zhen Yang, Ziwei Du, Minghan Zhang, Wei Du, Jie Chen, Zhen Duan, and Shu Zhao. 2025. Triples as the key: Structuring makes decomposition and verifica-tion easier in LLM-based tableQA. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Yunhu Ye, Binyuan Hui, Min Yang, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023. Large language mod-els are versatile decomposers: Decomposing evi-dence and questions for table-based reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation Retrieval , SIGIR ’23, page 174–184, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li, Qingn-ing Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. 2018. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic pars-ing and text-to-SQL task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 3911–3921, Brussels, Bel-gium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiaohan Yu, Pu Jian, and Chong Chen. 2025. TableRAG: A retrieval augmented generation frame-work for heterogeneous document reasoning. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 14063– 14082, Suzhou, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Junwen Zhang, Pu Chen, and Yin Zhang. 2025a. Table-moe: Neuro-symbolic routing for structured ex-pert reasoning in multimodal table understanding. 

Preprint , arXiv:2506.21393. Siyue Zhang, Anh Tuan Luu, and Chen Zhao. 2024a. SynTQA: Synergistic table-based question answer-ing via mixture of text-to-SQL and E2E TQA. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 2352–2364, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Xuanliang Zhang, Dingzirui Wang, Keyan Xu, Qingfu Zhu, and Wanxiang Che. 2025b. RoT: Enhancing table reasoning with iterative row-wise traversals. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 559– 579, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yunjia Zhang, Jordan Henkel, Avrilia Floratou, Joyce Cahoon, Shaleen Deep, and Jignesh M. Patel. 2024b. Reactable: Enhancing react for table question answer-ing. Proc. VLDB Endow. , 17(8):1981–1994. Zhehao Zhang, Yan Gao, and Jian-Guang Lou. 2024c. 

e5: Zero-shot hierarchical table analysis using aug-mented LLMs via explain, extract, execute, exhibit and extrapolate. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1244–1258, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Wei Zhou, Bolei Ma, Annemarie Friedrich, and Mohsen Mesgar. 2025. Table question answering in the era of large language models: A survey. 

11 A Additional Results 

This appendix reports additional experiments and diagnostics conducted to further evaluate the effec-tiveness, robustness, and efficiency of PARTAB. Unless stated otherwise, PARTAB uses the default LLM-based selection strategy and the same evalua-tion metrics as the main paper. 

Budget-Matched Full-Table Control. To distin-guish the contribution of partition-aware reasoning from the additional inference budget, we compare PARTAB with a full-table baseline that uses the same number of LLM calls. The budget-matched baseline repeatedly reasons over the complete seri-alized table but does not perform semantic group-ing or hierarchical partition selection.       

> Method LLM Calls WikiTQ EM Full-table (Budget-matched) 564.61 PARTAB 579.31
> Table 7: Budget-matched comparison between repeated full-table prompting and PARTAB.

As shown in Table 7, the five-call full-table base-line obtains 64.61 exact match on the evaluated WikiTQ subset, whereas PARTAB obtains 79.31, an improvement of 14.70 points. Thus, repeatedly prompting the model with the full table does not reproduce the benefits of explicitly constructing a localized evidence state. This control indicates that the performance im-provement is attributable primarily to semantic grouping, schema-level routing, and row-level par-tition selection rather than merely to additional LLM interactions.           

> Dataset Fallback Rate (%) Evidence Recall (%) WikiTQ 2.70 87.0 †
> TabFact 1.90 –TableBench 0.24 –
> Table 8: Selection stability across the evaluation datasets. †Evidence recall is based on manual anno-tation of 100 WikiTQ examples.

Selection Stability and Fallback Frequency. 

The LLM-based Part Selector may occasionally return an empty or malformed selection. In such cases, PARTAB invokes the deterministic B ASIC -SELECT fallback to preserve evidence coverage. Table 8 reports the empirical fallback frequency. The fallback is activated for only 2.7% of WikiTQ examples, 1.9% of TabFact examples, and 0.24% of TableBench examples. Most fallback cases are caused by malformed or unparsable structured out-puts rather than an explicit inability to identify rel-evant evidence. These low rates show that the LLM-guided se-lection procedure is generally stable. The fallback primarily serves as a robustness safeguard for rare generation or parsing failures and does not drive the reported performance. 

Evidence Coverage. The evaluated datasets do not provide gold cell-, row-, or column-level evi-dence annotations. We therefore manually inspect 100 WikiTQ examples and determine whether the partitions selected by PARTAB contain all evi-dence necessary to answer the corresponding ques-tion. The selected partitions achieve an evidence re-call of 87%. This result indicates that the compact contexts constructed by PARTAB contain suffi-cient evidence in most cases. The remaining fail-ures primarily involve aggregation-heavy questions requiring broad row coverage or cases where a re-quired row occurs in an unselected partition. This analysis separates evidence-localization failures from downstream execution errors. In par-ticular, an incorrect final answer does not neces-sarily imply that partition selection failed, because the answer executor may still make a reasoning or computation error after receiving the correct evi-dence. 

B Additional Analysis 

Accuracy–Efficiency Trade-off. We further compare the inference efficiency of PARTAB with full-table prompting and recent multi-stage table reasoning systems. Table 9 reports the number of LLM calls, average tokens processed per query, and TabFact accuracy. The default LLM-based configuration of PARTAB uses five LLM calls and approximately 2.3k tokens per query. In comparison, Chain-of-Table requires up to 25 calls and approximately 13.2k tokens, while TableMaster uses 11 calls and approximately 3.3k tokens. Despite using substan-tially fewer calls, PARTAB obtains the highest accuracy among the compared methods. The similarity-based variant is the most token-efficient configuration, using approximately 1.6k tokens per query. However, its lower accuracy shows that reducing context is beneficial only when 12 Method LLM Calls Avg. Tokens / Query TabFact Acc. Full-table prompting 1 2.1k 73.22 Chain-of-Table ≤ 25 13.2k 85.09 TableMaster 11 3.3k 90.12 PARTAB – Basic 4 2.1k 87.88 PARTAB – Similarity 4 1.6k 85.87 PARTAB – LLM-based 5 2.3k 90.48 

> Table 9: Accuracy–efficiency comparison on TabFact. Token counts cover the complete per-query pipeline. Bold values indicate the lowest token usage and the highest accuracy, respectively.

the selected evidence is semantically adequate. Ag-gressive context reduction based on lexical similar-ity can omit evidence required for compositional reasoning.            

> Method Avg. Selected Parts ↓WikiTQ (EM) Full Table 17.56 59.43 Basic Selection 6.50 74.71 Similarity-based 5.36 67.25 LLM-based 3.88 79.31
> Table 10: Partition reduction efficiency on WikiTable-Questions. We report the average number of selected parts and Exact Match (EM) accuracy.

Partition Reduction Efficiency. Table 10 shows that PARTAB significantly reduces the amount of context required for reasoning while improving performance. Compared to full-table prompting, all partition-based methods select substantially fewer parts, leading to more focused reasoning. Among them, LLM-based selection achieves the best trade-off, reducing the average number of se-lected parts to 3.88 while achieving the highest accuracy (79.31 EM). This indicates that effective partition selection not only improves efficiency but also enhances reasoning quality by filtering out irrelevant context. In contrast, similarity-based se-lection reduces the number of parts but suffers from lower accuracy, highlighting that aggressive reduc-tion without semantic understanding can harm per-formance. 

Dataset Structural Statistics. The evaluated datasets differ substantially in table size and struc-ture, as shown in Table 11. WikiTQ contains the longest tables, including examples with up to 517 rows. TableBench contains examples with up to 176 rows, whereas TabFact tables contain at most 47 rows. All three benchmarks also contain wide schemas, with maximum column counts between 20 and 21. These statistics motivate partitioning along both table dimensions. Long tables require row-level evidence localization, while wide tables require schema-level routing to prevent irrelevant columns from diluting the executor’s attention. 

C Discussions 

When Partition-Aware Reasoning Helps. The additional experiments provide a more precise char-acterization of when partition-aware reasoning is beneficial. The largest improvements occur on long or wide tables, where the evidence required by a question occupies only a small portion of the com-plete table. In such settings, full-table prompting exposes the model to many irrelevant values, in-creasing attention dilution and making it harder to localize and reason over the relevant evidence. Partitioning is particularly effective for lookup, comparison, and fact verification questions. These tasks usually depend on a localized set of attributes and rows, making it possible to construct a compact evidence state without losing task-relevant infor-mation. The large gains on TabFact-Hard across all three model backbones provide strong evidence for this behavior. Partition-aware reasoning is also useful when table cells contain noisy or free-form text that is difficult to filter using exact symbolic predicates. Semantic grouping and LLM-based selection can identify conceptually relevant attributes even when the question and table use different surface forms. 

Relationship to Full-Table and Single-View Rea-soning. The benefit of PARTAB is not simply that it passes fewer tokens to the answer executor. A pruning method can also reduce context length, but usually constructs a single reduced table. If that reduced view omits a required column or row, the missing evidence cannot be recovered during reasoning. 13 Dataset Number of Rows Number of Columns Min Avg Max Min Avg Max WikiTableQuestions 5 25.65 517 3 6.39 21 TabFact 5 13.41 47 5 6.29 20 TableBench 6 16.75 176 4 6.64 20 

> Table 11: Structural statistics of the evaluation datasets.

In contrast, PARTAB preserves a collection of complementary, row-linked table parts. Semantic group selection first identifies the relevant schema subspace, after which part selection identifies rel-evant row chunks within that subspace. The uni-versal row_id key allows evidence from different semantic groups to be aligned during answer exe-cution. Thus, partitioning acts as a reasoning control mechanism rather than only a preprocessing opera-tion. The model reasons over multiple structured table regions while preserving their relational corre-spondence instead of receiving either the complete table or a single flattened sub-table. 

Relationship to Text-to-SQL Reasoning. Text-to-SQL methods are highly effective when a ques-tion can be translated into precise filtering, joining, sorting, or aggregation operations. Executing the generated query in a database engine also provides reliable numerical computation. However, the evaluated benchmarks include questions requiring semantic verification, implicit comparison, and interpretation of noisy or free-form textual cells. These operations are not always naturally expressible as exact SQL predicates. Text-to-SQL systems may therefore fail during predicate construction even when the necessary evidence is present. PARTAB addresses a complementary bottle-neck: how to localize and structure evidence before semantic reasoning. It does not replace symbolic execution. For completeness-sensitive aggregation questions, a promising extension would combine partition-aware semantic localization with deter-ministic SQL or program execution. 

Remaining Limitations. The additional analyses also clarify several limitations of the current frame-work. First, part selection remains the dominant source of error. Although the selected partitions ob-tain 87% evidence recall on the manually annotated WikiTQ sample, the remaining selection failures can directly prevent correct downstream reasoning. Second, localized evidence selection is less suit-able for questions requiring exhaustive aggregation over most or all table rows. Selecting only a subset of partitions can violate the completeness require-ment of counting, global extrema, or large-scale aggregation operations. Third, the effectiveness of the pipeline re-mains dependent on the instruction-following and structured-output capabilities of the selected LLM backbone. A promising extension is an adaptive global– local controller that first identifies whether the ques-tion requires localized semantic evidence or global table completeness. Localized questions could use the current partition-aware pipeline, while completeness-sensitive questions could be routed to full-table or symbolic execution. 

D Extended Literature Review 

LLM-based Table Question Answering. Re-cent advances have significantly improved Table Question Answering (TableQA) using large lan-guage models. Surveys highlight rapid progress in LLM-based table understanding while identify-ing scalability and reasoning reliability as major challenges (Zhou et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2025; Fang et al., 2024; Cao and Liu, 2026). Direct prompting approaches enable flexible semantic reasoning but struggle with long tables due to attention limita-tions and incomplete evidence utilization (Tyagi et al., 2025). Earlier transformer-based models such as TAPAS demonstrated the effectiveness of pretraining for tabular reasoning, establishing foun-dations for modern LLM-based approaches (Herzig et al., 2020). 

Text-to-SQL and Symbolic Table Reasoning. 

A dominant paradigm formulates table reasoning as Text-to-SQL generation, translating natural lan-guage queries into executable programs evaluated by database engines (Yu et al., 2018; Nahid et al., 2026). Benchmarks such as BIRD emphasize real-istic database reasoning scenarios requiring accu-14 rate aggregation and efficient execution (Li et al., 2023). Symbolic execution enables reliable numer-ical reasoning; however, these approaches depend on constructing structured predicates and often struggle when filtering conditions require semantic interpretation over noisy textual cells. Recent work integrating LLM planning with executable reason-ing further highlights both the strengths and limi-tations of symbolic pipelines (Wang et al., 2025c; Evkarpidi and Tutubalina, 2025; Liu et al., 2022). 

Decomposition and Context Reduction for Long Tables. To address scalability challenges, sev-eral works reduce reasoning complexity through decomposition strategies. These include ques-tion decomposition and table decomposition meth-ods that divide large tables into smaller reason-ing units. TabSQLify introduces SQL-guided sub-table extraction to improve reasoning efficiency on large tables (Nahid and Rafiei, 2024b), while TabSD extends decomposition to free-form noisy tables (Wang et al., 2025b). Structured reason-ing frameworks such as Tree-of-Table further or-ganize hierarchical reasoning over tabular data (Ji et al., 2025). Long-context benchmarks including LongTableBench and NeedleInATable demonstrate that reasoning performance degrades substantially as table size increases (Li et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a; Wu et al., 2025). Recent work has explored decomposition, re-trieval, and hybrid execution for table reason-ing. Methods such as ITR (Lin et al., 2023) and PieTa (Lee et al., 2025) focus on retrieving or constructing relevant sub-tables to reduce long-table noise, while RoT (Zhang et al., 2025b) per-forms row-wise reasoning to improve scalability. CABINET (Patnaik et al., 2024) addresses noisy tables through content relevance weighting, and TABDSR (Jiang et al., 2025) combines decom-position with program-based reasoning for nu-merical tasks. Hybrid frameworks such as Re-AcTable (Zhang et al., 2024b) and Weaver (Khoja et al., 2025) integrate LLM reasoning with ex-ternal tools, while E 5 (Zhang et al., 2024c) and TIDE (Yang et al., 2025) introduce structured in-termediate representations for improved reasoning and verification. In contrast, PARTAB treats parti-tioning as a reasoning control mechanism, combin-ing semantic grouping with row-linked selection to enable structured reasoning over partitioned table views. While decomposition improves evidence local-ization, restricting reasoning to selected subsets in-troduces a critical trade-off: required evidence may be omitted when tasks demand exhaustive global computation. 

Hybrid Neural–Symbolic Table Reasoning. An emerging direction combines LLM reasoning with executable intermediate representations such as SQL queries, programs, or dataframe operations. Hybrid systems leverage LLMs for interpreta-tion while relying on deterministic execution en-gines for numerical correctness and interpretabil-ity (Wang et al., 2025c; Evkarpidi and Tutubalina, 2025; Abhyankar et al., 2025). Approaches such as SynTQA demonstrate complementary strengths between symbolic execution and end-to-end rea-soning under different task conditions (Zhang et al., 2024a; Cheng et al., 2023). Neuro-symbolic rout-ing frameworks such as TableMoE further explore structured expert reasoning for tabular understand-ing (Zhang et al., 2025a; Ye et al., 2023). 

Retrieval-Augmented Reasoning over Struc-tured Data. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has recently been extended to structured and semi-structured data sources, including tables and databases (Tyagi et al., 2025; Nahid and Rafiei, 2025). Table-aware retrieval methods index table regions or schema components and retrieve relevant fragments prior to reasoning, improving scalability by avoiding full-context processing. Recent work has explored retrieval-augmented approaches for scalable table reasoning. Chen et al. (2024) intro-duce TableRAG, which enables large-scale table understanding by retrieving relevant table segments from million-token contexts. Similarly, Yu et al. (2025) propose a retrieval-augmented framework for heterogeneous document reasoning that com-bines text retrieval with SQL-based execution over tabular data. However, retrieval-based approaches inherit an important limitation: incomplete retrieval can produce confident but incorrect answers, partic-ularly for aggregation or counting tasks requiring full-table access. 

Limitations of Existing Approaches. Despite substantial progress, existing methods expose com-plementary trade-offs. Symbolic approaches pro-vide reliable aggregation but depend on precise structured predicates and can struggle with noisy or free-form textual content. Direct LLM reasoning offers greater semantic flexibility but becomes less reliable as table size and irrelevant context increase. 15 Decomposition and retrieval methods improve scal-ability by reducing context, yet may omit evidence required for completeness-sensitive operations. These trade-offs suggest that effective table rea-soning should distinguish semantic evidence local-ization from global execution . Rather than treating any single reasoning paradigm as universally suf-ficient, a more general design should coordinate localized semantic reasoning with exhaustive or symbolic computation when required. PARTAB 

addresses the first part of this problem by construct-ing structured, query-relevant evidence states over table partitions, while complementary global or symbolic execution remains an important direction for completeness-sensitive reasoning. 

E LLM Usage 

All technical content, contributions, analyses, and implementations are entirely our own. Large lan-guage models were used only to improve clarity and readability, and generating charts and diagrams. LLMs were occasionally used for minor editing and code debugging, with all outputs reviewed and verified by the authors. 

F Illustrative Examples and Prompt Template 

We present three illustrative examples to demon-strate how PARTAB operates across different rea-soning scenarios, including numerical computation, comparison, and entity lookup. These examples highlight how partition-aware reasoning enables effective evidence localization and improves rea-soning accuracy by focusing on relevant subsets of the table. Figure 6, 7, 8 illustrates a representative examples of three different categories. We also provide the detail prompt used to imple-ment our method in Figure 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 16 Input Table and Question Table (Preview): 

row_id rank peak elevation_m . . . 1 1 galdhøpiggen 2469 . . . 2 2 jiehkkevárri 1833 . . . 3 3 snøhetta 2286 . . . 4 4 store lenangstind 1625 . . . ... ... ... ... ...

Question: How much higher is the elevation of the mountain with the highest elevation than the mountain with the lowest elevation? 

Step 1: Question Analysis 

{ "question_type": "multi_step", "needs_row_filtering": false, "needs_aggregation": true, "needs_comparison": true, "needs_sorting": false, "expected_answer_type": "number" }

Step 2: Column Grouping 

{ "peak_identity": ["rank", "peak"], "peak_metrics": ["elevation_m", "prominence_m", "isolation_km"], "location": ["municipality", "county"] }

Step 3: Group Selection Required groups: ["peak_metrics"] 

Step 4: Partition Selection Selection mode: basic 

Selected parts: peak_metrics_1_5, ..., peak_metrics_16_19 

Total partitions: 12 

Selected parts: 4

Step 5: Answer Execution Predicted Answer: 1207 m 

Gold Answer: 1207 

Exact Match: True 

Figure 6: Illustrative example of PARTAB on a multi-step numerical reasoning task. The table is truncated for clarity; ellipses ( . . . ) indicate omitted columns and rows. PARTAB isolates the relevant metric columns, selects a small subset of partitions, and correctly computes the difference between the highest and lowest elevations. 

17 Input Table and Question Table (Preview): 

row_id country biodiversity . . . 1 Belize 3771 . . . 2 Costa Rica 13630 . . . 3 El Salvador 3618 . . . 4 Guatemala 9927 . . . ... ... ... ...

Question: Which country in Central America is the most biodiverse? 

Step 1: Question Analysis 

{ "question_type": "comparison", "needs_row_filtering": true, "needs_aggregation": false, "needs_comparison": true, "needs_sorting": true, "expected_answer_type": "entity" }

Step 2: Column Grouping 

{ "geography": ["country"], "vertebrates": ["amphibians", "birds", "mammals", "reptile", "total_terrestrial_vertebrates"], "plants_and_biodiversity": ["vascular_plants", "biodiversity"] }

Step 3: Group Selection Required groups: ["geography", "plants_and_biodiversity"] 

Step 4: Partition Selection Selection mode: similarity 

Selected parts: geography_1_5, geography_6_7, plants_and_biodiversity_1_5, plants_and_biodiversity_6_7 

Total partitions: 6

Selected parts: 4

Step 5: Answer Execution Predicted Answer: Costa Rica 

Gold Answer: Costa Rica 

Exact Match: True 

Figure 7: Illustrative example of PARTAB on a comparison-based reasoning task. The table is truncated for clarity; ellipses ( . . . ) indicate omitted columns and rows. PARTAB selects the relevant semantic groups and partitions, enabling accurate identification of the most biodiverse country. 

18 Input Table and Question Table (Preview): 

row_id heat rank name . . . 1 1 1 Gabriela Szabo (ROU) . . . 2 1 2 Paula Radcliffe (GBR) . . . 3 2 3 Fernanda Ribeiro (POR) . . . 4 1 4 Harumi Hiroyama (JPN) . . . 5 1 5 Roberta Brunet (ITA) . . . ... ... ... ... ...30 . . . . . . Li Wei (CHN) . . . 

Question: What country does Li Wei represent? 

Step 1: Question Analysis 

{ "question_type": "lookup", "needs_row_filtering": true, "needs_aggregation": false, "needs_comparison": false, "needs_sorting": false, "expected_answer_type": "entity" }

Step 2: Column Grouping 

{ "competition": ["heat", "rank"], "athlete": ["name"], "outcome": ["result", "notes"] }

Step 3: Group Selection Required groups: ["athlete"] 

Step 4: Partition Selection Selection mode: llm 

Selected parts: athlete_1_5, ..., athlete_26_30 

Total partitions: 27 

Selected parts: 6

Step 5: Answer Execution Predicted Answer: CHN 

Gold Answer: China 

Exact Match: True 

Figure 8: Illustrative example of PARTAB on a lookup-based reasoning task. The table is truncated for clarity; ellipses ( . . . ) indicate omitted rows and columns. PARTAB identifies the relevant row and extracts the country information from the athlete name field. 

19 Question Analyzer Prompt 

You are a question analyzer for table reasoning. You will receive a natural language question over a table. Your task is to infer the likely reasoning requirements of the question. In particular, determine the question type, whether row filtering is needed, whether aggregation, comparison, or sorting is required, and the expected answer type. Question: {QUESTION} Return STRICT JSON only in the following format: 

{"question_type": "lookup", "needs_row_filtering": true, "needs_aggregation": false, "needs_comparison": false, "needs_sorting": false, "expected_answer_type": "entity" }

Allowed values for question_type :

lookup, aggregation, comparison, counting, sorting, multi_step, other 

Allowed values for expected_answer_type :

entity, number, boolean, text, list, other 

Only output a valid JSON object. Do not include “‘json or any additional explanation. 

Figure 9: Question Analyzer Prompt Template used to infer reasoning requirements from a natural language question. 

Column Grouping Prompt 

You are designing semantic column groups for partition-aware reasoning over a table. You will receive: - The question - The table schema - A few sample rows from the table Your goal is to group the table columns into a small number of semantically coherent groups that support partition-aware reasoning. The universal linking key is row_id . Do not include row_id in any semantic group. Each non-key column must appear in exactly one group. Prefer 2 to 5 groups when possible, and use short, meaningful group names. Question: {QUESTION} Table schema: {SCHEMA} Sample rows: {TABLE_PREVIEW} Return STRICT JSON only in the following format: 

{"column_groups": { "group_name_1": ["col1", "col2"], "group_name_2": ["col3", "col4"] }, "key_columns": ["row_id"] }

Only output a valid JSON object. Do not include “‘json or any additional explanation. 

Figure 10: Column Grouping Prompt Template used to construct semantically coherent column groups for partition-aware table reasoning. 

20 Group Selection Prompt 

You are selecting the minimum required column groups needed to answer a table question. You will receive: - The original question - The question analysis output - The available column groups Your goal is to select the minimum set of column groups required to answer the question. If the question requires filtering, lookup, comparison, aggregation, or sorting, include the relevant groups. Return only valid group names from the provided list. Question: {QUESTION} Question analysis: {QUESTION_ANALYSIS} Available column groups: {COLUMN_GROUPS} Return STRICT JSON only in the following format: 

{"required_groups": ["group1", "group2"] }

Only output a valid JSON object. Do not include “‘json or any additional explanation. 

Figure 11: Group Selection Prompt Template used to identify the minimum required semantic groups for answering a question. 

LLM-based Part Selection Prompt 

You are selecting the minimum required table parts needed to answer a question. You will receive: - The original question - A list of candidate table parts, where each part includes its part name, group name, row range, columns, and table content Your goal is to select the minimum set of part names needed to answer the question. Only return valid part names from the provided candidate list. Question: {QUESTION} Candidate table parts: {PARTS} Return STRICT JSON only in the following format: 

{"required_part_names": ["part1", "part2"] }

Only output a valid JSON object. Do not include “‘json or any additional explanation. 

Figure 12: LLM-based Part Selection Prompt Template used to select the minimum required table parts from the candidate partition set. 

Answer Execution Prompt 

You are a Table Question Answering assistant. Answer the question using ONLY the provided table parts. The linking key across parts is row_id . Do not use outside knowl-edge. Do not explain your reasoning. If the answer cannot be found from the table parts, return exactly: I cannot find it. 

Question: {QUESTION} Table parts: {CONTEXT} Return only the final short answer. 

Figure 13: Answer Execution Prompt Template used to generate the final answer from the selected table parts. 

21