Title: SocialReasonBench: A Video-QA Benchmark for Social Reasoning with Counterfactual Narrative Videos

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.30716v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 03:10:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# SocialReasonBench: A Video-QA Benchmark for Social Reasoning with Counterfactual Narrative Videos 

Zheyu Huang 1, Zijing Shi 1, Haozhe Luo 2, Huadong Tang 1,Mingyu Liu 3, Meng Fang 4, Ling Chen 11AAII, University of Technology Sydney 2Northeastern University 

> 3

Fudan University 4University of Liverpool 

{Zheyu.Huang, Huadong.Tang}@student.uts.edu.au {Zijing.Shi-1, Ling.Chen}@uts.edu.au 202312249@stu.neu.edu.cn 25213070025@m.fudan.edu.cn Meng.Fang@liverpool.ac.uk 

Abstract 

Recent advances in Large Multimodal Mod-els (LMMs) have greatly improved video un-derstanding, yet their ability to reason about human-centered social situations remains lim-ited. Existing benchmarks typically rely on videos with a single observed trajectory, mak-ing it difficult to determine whether models truly understand social dynamics or merely exploit recurring narrative patterns. We in-troduce SocialReasonBench, a video multiple-choice QA benchmark for evaluating socially grounded reasoning in scenarios derived from interactive narratives. Built from gameplay videos of Detroit: Become Human , the bench-mark leverages branching storylines where player decisions lead to alternative social out-comes that can be checked against the game’s own script, flowchart, and recorded branches. We develop a multi-agent curation pipeline that localizes socially meaningful clips, grounds an-swer labels in game-state signals, and gener-ates theory-guided questions with diagnostic distractors. SocialReasonBench covers seven reasoning dimensions, including intent recogni-tion, emotional empathy, moral dilemma, coun-terfactual reasoning, and causal antecedent. Ex-periments on contemporary LMMs show that models perform reasonably well on basic social understanding but struggle with counterfactual and causal reasoning. Further ablation and di-agnostic error analyses reveal that models often depend on incomplete modality cues and fall into reasoning traps such as visual shortcuts, highlighting a gap between observable event recognition and deeper reasoning over latent social states. 

1 Introduction 

Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have achieved strong performance in processing and understand-ing video data (Zhang et al., 2023; Maaz et al., 2024; Cai et al., 2025), but their deployment in 

Figure 1: Model performance across SocialReason-Bench dimensions. 

human-centric scenarios requires deeper reasoning about social context. Beyond recognizing visible actions and events, models must infer latent social dynamics, including beliefs, intentions, emotions, and interpersonal motives. Such capabilities mat-ter for downstream applications such as healthcare and socially assistive AI systems (Nichol et al., 2024), which motivate this study in the long term; we make no claim that benchmark performance transfers to those settings. Existing benchmarks for social video reasoning remain limited. Most are built from films or short video clips (Zadeh et al., 2019; Lei et al., 2020, 2018), where narratives unfold along a fixed and linear trajectory. This makes it difficult to deter-mine whether a model is performing genuine social reasoning or merely exploiting recurring narrative patterns. In addition, ground truth often relies on post-hoc human annotation, which is costly and may introduce interpretive bias. arXiv:2608.30716v1 [cs.CL] 31 Aug 2026 Gameplay Video         

> Agent Alpha is a negotiation expert aiming to rescue the hostage. Agent Beta is holding a hostage near a rooftop
> edge, while a police helicopter provides aerial support and surveillance.
> Branch A Branch B
> Counterfactual Reasoning
> Example Question:
> In the video, Agent Alpha has the helicopter
> withdraw. If he had refused Agent Beta? s
> request, what would have been the most
> direct consequence?
> Agent Alpha has the helicopter withdraw, and the
> interface showed an increase in the PROBABILITY
> OF SUCCESS.
> Agent Beta grew even more agitated as the screen
> showed the PROBABILITY OF SUCCESS dropping.
> This task requires LMMs to infer the likely
> outcome of an alternative decision.
> Causal Antecedent
> Example Question:
> At the end of the video, Agent Beta loses
> emotional control. Which earlier event most
> directly explains this outcome?
> This task requires LMMs to reason backward
> from an observed outcome to identify the
> most plausible preceding cause or condition.

Figure 2: Game branching causal structure with two example tasks: counterfactual reasoning over alternative branches and causal antecedent reasoning from outcomes to preceding causes. 

A more diagnostic evaluation should therefore move beyond interpreting observed social interac-tions and test whether models can infer how alterna-tive decisions would reshape social consequences (Pearl, 2009). This is difficult to achieve with static video data, as each clip presents only one realized storyline. Although simulated environments offer greater controllability (Fang et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2023), most are designed around task completion or long-horizon interaction (Shi et al., 2025), rather than socially rich reasoning. To address this gap, we introduce SocialRea-sonBench, a video-QA benchmark for evaluating social reasoning in LMMs. 1 It assesses seven fine-grained dimensions of social reasoning, span-ning intent recognition, moral dilemma, counterfac-tual reasoning, and causal antecedent. Built from video segments extracted from interactive narrative games, SocialReasonBench leverages branching narrative structures to construct naturally paired counterfactual outcomes for socially situated de-cisions. Here “interactive” refers to the source medium rather than to the evaluation protocol: ev-ery instance is answered as a standard multiple-choice question. We instantiate the benchmark with Detroit: Become Human , developed by Quan-tic Dream, whose realistic character interactions and morally consequential choices provide a rich testbed for socially grounded reasoning. We develop a scalable benchmark construction pipeline that combines multi-agent data curation 

> 1

The benchmark and code are available at https:// socialreasonbench.github.io .

with human verification. Given long-form nar-rative gameplay videos, the pipeline first identi-fies socially salient clips and then generates ques-tions based on a theory-informed taxonomy of so-cial reasoning abilities. Ground-truth answers are supported by in-game signals, including character affinity scores and dialogue states; each label can be checked against the game’s own record. Candi-date answers are designed around common model failure modes, yielding plausible distractors that test specific reasoning errors. The resulting Social-ReasonBench contains over 500 video-QA pairs. Each instance includes a short video clip, one so-cial reasoning question, and six candidate answers with a single ground-truth label. We evaluate 8 representative closed- and open-weight LMMs on SocialReasonBench. Current models perform relatively well on basic social un-derstanding tasks, such as intent recognition and behavior prediction, but struggle with causal an-tecedent and counterfactual reasoning. Modality ablation further shows that audio cues are impor-tant for affective and causal reasoning, while diag-nostic trap analysis reveals that models often rely on salient visual cues or external priors instead of following game-grounded social consequences. Overall, this paper makes three main contribu-tions. First, we introduce SocialReasonBench, a video multiple-choice QA benchmark that lever-ages interactive narrative games as sources of so-cial scenarios, where branching storylines make alternative outcomes observable. Second, we de-velop a scalable multi-agent curation pipeline that constructs social reasoning QA pairs guided by socio-cognitive theories and grounded in game-state signals. Third, we evaluate 8 widely used closed- and open-weight LMMs on SocialReason-Bench, showing that current models handle basic social understanding but struggle with causal and counterfactual reasoning. 

2 Related Work 

Video Reasoning With LMMs. Recent LMMs for video understanding, including Video-LLaMA (Zhang et al., 2023), Video-ChatGPT (Maaz et al., 2024), and Video-LLaVA (Lin et al., 2024), have extended language models to temporally structured visual inputs through representation learning, mul-timodal alignment, and instruction tuning, achiev-ing strong performance on a range of video under-standing tasks (Madan et al., 2024). In parallel, benchmarks such as MVBench (Li et al., 2024), Video-MME (Fu et al., 2025), EgoSchema (Man-galam et al., 2023), and LongVideoBench (Wu et al., 2024) have been proposed to evaluate video perception and reasoning across diverse settings, including action recognition, event understanding and temporal reasoning. 

Multimodal Social Reasoning Evaluation. Be-yond general video understanding, multimodal so-cial reasoning evaluates whether models can infer implicit social states from human-centered scenar-ios. Prior benchmarks, such as TVQA (Lei et al., 2018), VLEP (Lei et al., 2020), and VisualCOMET (Park et al., 2020), study narrative understanding and commonsense inference over events, intents, and consequences. More directly, Social-IQ (Zadeh et al., 2019) and Social-IQ 2.0 (Wilf et al., 2023) evaluate social intelligence in naturalistic video in-teractions, covering intentions, emotions, and inter-personal cues. Recent multimodal benchmarks fur-ther extend this line to fine-grained social reasoning (Mathur et al., 2025), social interaction understand-ing and reasoning (Kong et al., 2025), theory-of-mind (ToM) reasoning (Villa-Cueva et al., 2025), and human-centric relationship inference and inten-tion prediction (Cai et al., 2025). However, these benchmarks rely on fixed video clips with prede-fined trajectories. In contrast, our work evaluates counterfactual social outcomes in interactive narra-tive scenarios with branching decisions. 

Counterfactual Reasoning Evaluation. Coun-terfactual reasoning evaluates whether models can predict how outcomes would change if a different action or event had occurred (Pearl, 2009). Prior work has studied this ability in language through counterfactual story rewriting (Qin et al., 2019), open-domain QA under counterfactual presupposi-tions (Yu et al., 2023), and formal causal inference (Chen et al., 2026). In multimodal settings, recent benchmarks extend counterfactual evaluation to vi-sual question answering with counterfactual image presuppositions (Zhang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025) and video understanding under hypothetical event conditions (Zhou et al., 2025). However, exist-ing benchmarks mainly focus on visual changes or general event outcomes, leaving how alternative de-cisions affect social relationships and interpersonal consequences underexplored. ACQUIRED (Wu et al., 2023) is particularly relevant, pairing real-life videos with human-authored counterfactual alterna-tives. In contrast, our counterfactuals are grounded in alternative branches that were actually realized in the source environment. 

3 SocialReasonBench 

We present SocialReasonBench, a video multiple-choice QA benchmark for evaluating social rea-soning in LMMs. The benchmark leverages in-teractive narrative games as a controllable source of socially grounded scenarios, where character decisions induce branching trajectories and lead to verifiable social outcomes. We construct the benchmark through a multi-agent curation frame-work that segments gameplay videos into scenario clips and synthesizes theory-guided QA instances. Unlike benchmarks that rely primarily on human annotation, our correct answers are grounded in game-state signals, including affinity scores, deci-sion branches, and downstream narrative outcomes. This section describes the task formulation, data synthesis pipeline, grounding criteria, quality con-trol process, and benchmark statistics. 

3.1 Problem Formulation Game Environment. We build our benchmark on Detroit: Become Human , a narrative game with 32 chapters. Each chapter includes an in-game flowchart that maps all possible story paths. We abstract each chapter-level flowchart into a branching narrative graph G = ( S, A, T ), where 

S denotes narrative states, A possible actions, and 

T : S × A → S is a deterministic transition func-tion. Formally, let st ∈ S denote the narrative state Director Agent  Tracker Agent     

> INPUT
> Generator Agent
> Human
> Verif ication
> Game Script Gameplay Video
> OUTPUT
> Targeted Clip Coverage Tag
> Game Signal
> Extract
> observable
> game signals
> Implicit Signals Explicit Signals
> SocialReasonBench
> Extract
> underlying
> branching logic
> Entit y Anonymization
> INPUT
> Narrative- Guided
> Video Localization
> Assign Coverage Tag
> OUTPUT
> Targeted Clip Coverage Tag Game Signal
> INPUT
> Theory- Guided QA Generation
> Diagnostic Distractor Design
> Logic
> Trap
> Know ledge
> Trap
> Interpretation
> Trap
> Visual
> Trap
> Attribution
> Trap
> OUTPUT
> 6- w ay QA instance
> Game Script Coverage Tag

Figure 3: Overview of the multi-agent video-QA synthesis framework. 

at step t. Given an available action at ∈ A (st), the graph defines a transition st+1 = T (st, a t), which maps each valid state-action pair to a unique suc-cessor state. A realized trajectory is represented as 

τ = ( s1, a 1, s 2, . . . , a T −1, s T ), while unrealized outgoing edges along or near τ define counterfac-tual branches induced by alternative actions. 

Benchmark Instance. Each benchmark instance is formulated as a video multiple-choice QA prob-lem. It is defined as x = ( v, b, q, C, y ), where v

is a video clip, b is an anonymized textual back-ground describing the situation, q is a question, 

C = {c1, . . . , c K } is a set of candidate options, and 

y ∈ C denotes the correct option. Given (v, b, q, C),a model predicts ˆy = f (v, b, q, C) and is evalu-ated by whether ˆy = y. The correct label y is determined from hidden game signals z, which are never shown to the model. 

3.2 Multi-Agent Video-QA Synthesis Framework Overview. We construct SocialRea-sonBench through a role-specialized multi-agent framework that converts flowchart graphs G into video-QA instances. The framework consists of a Director Agent for clip selection and taxonomy mapping, a Tracker Agent for grounding, and a Generator Agent for QA synthesis. The Director Agent first selects socially meaningful clips {vi}

and maps each clip to a predefined two-dimensional taxonomy W = I × R , which spans interpersonal interaction types and cognitive reasoning abilities. The Tracker Agent aligns each clip with the corre-sponding states and hidden game signals in G to establish grounded social outcomes. Conditioned on the clip, grounded outcome, and the assigned taxonomy category, the Generator Agent synthe-sizes a theory-guided question qi, the correct label 

yi, and a set of candidate options Ci. Human annota-tors then verify each instance. This process yields 

D = {(vi, b i, q i, Ci, y i)}Ni=1 . Figure 3 illustrates the multi-agent video-QA synthesis framework. 

Director Agent: Social Clip Selection. Process-ing long gameplay videos with LMMs remains challenging due to long-context retrieval and tem-poral reasoning issues (Wu et al., 2024). To ob-tain compact yet socially meaningful clips, the Di-rector Agent adopts a narrative-guided video lo-calization strategy. Given a chapter-level graph 

G = ( S, A, T ) and a coverage set of gameplay videos and scripts spanning the chapter’s terminal outcomes, the agent identifies candidate segments around key narrative nodes, including: (i) branch-ing choices that lead to different downstream tra-jectories; and (ii) moments where game variables explicitly change, such as affinity shifts and rela-tionship updates. The Director Agent then assigns each candidate node a two-dimensional tag that captures both the social interaction type depicted in the scene and the cognitive reasoning capability targeted by the instance. These tags guide later QA synthesis and encourage balanced coverage across social situations and reasoning skills; the full taxonomy is described in Section 3.3. After lo-cating the aligned moments, the agent emits coarse boundaries around each target node; a downstream cutting step pads both sides with a fixed context buffer ( ±15s) to preserve preceding context, tran-sient UI logs, and immediate consequence cues, yielding the final clip vi.

Tracker Agent: Game Signal Grounding. For each selected clip vi, the Tracker Agent extracts hidden game signals zi that determine the under-lying social outcome. These signals are obtained from two sources: (i) explicit signals , which are directly observable from the gameplay interface or scene progression, such as visible UI updates indicating affinity changes, relationship shifts, or public opinion changes and (ii) implicit signals ,which are recovered by aligning the executed ac-tion and resulting branch with the game-defined flowchart, scripts, and branch preconditions. For example, if a character refuses to cooperate after a player decision, and the flowchart specifies that this branch is reachable only under a low-trust con-dition, the Tracker Agent records an implicit state such as low trust . These signals provide a verifi-able grounding source for constructing the correct answer label. 

Generator Agent: QA Synthesis. Given a se-lected clip vi and its game-grounded signal set zi,the Generator Agent synthesizes a QA instance ac-cording to the coverage tag, formalized as (i, r ) ∈W over social interaction types and reasoning ca-pabilities. Since Detroit: Become Human is a widely known game with extensive online walkthroughs, LMMs may exploit memorized priors instead of reasoning from the provided clip. To mitigate data contamination and shortcut learning, we apply en-tity anonymization during QA generation. Specif-ically, we construct a replacement dictionary that maps game-specific entities to semantically neu-tral placeholders, covering character names, orga-nizations, locations, species concepts, and android model identifiers (e.g., “Connor” → “Agent Al-pha”, “CyberLife” → “OmniCorp”, and “android” 

→ “synthetic agent”). The Generator Agent then constructs the anonymized background bi, the question qi, and the candidate option set Ci. The correct answer yi

is required to be entailed by the game-grounded out-come specified in zi, whereas each incorrect option is designed to be plausible but inconsistent with the grounded branch logic. To make model failures more diagnostic, distractors are further organized according to predefined trap types, including visual traps, logic traps, interpretation traps, knowledge traps, and attribution traps. This process yields taxonomy-guided QA instances with verifiable an-swer labels grounded in the game state. 

Human Verification. We conduct a manual audit to assess the reliability of the generated instances (see Figure 8). Starting from the 730 clip candi-dates produced by the automatic pipeline, the au-thor team first removes duplicated branch replays and near-identical clips that correspond to the same narrative decision and reasoning target. The au-dit focuses on three aspects: (i) clip–taxonomy alignment , whether the selected clip matches its assigned two-dimensional tag, including the social interaction type and the target reasoning capability; (ii) video–QA consistency , whether the generated question and options are grounded in the video con-tent; and (iii) label validity , whether the correct answer is supported by the game-grounded signals. Across the audited candidates, we observe no fail-ure pattern in clip selection, taxonomy assignment, or label grounding. This process yields the final set of 532 verified QA instances. An instance was re-tained only if it passed all three checks, with further details on the verification and evaluation protocol provided in Appendix I. 

3.3 QA Curation Criteria Two-Axis Task Taxonomy. We define a two-axis task taxonomy W = I × R . The first axis I

captures the type of social interaction depicted in a clip. It consists of four categories: • Prosocial : interactions involving cooperation, support, and altruistic behavior. • Adversarial : interactions involving conflict, hos-tility, coercion, and harm. • Strategic : interactions involving deception, ma-nipulation, negotiation, and concealed intentions. • Normative : interactions involving authority, obligation, moral dilemmas, and socially sanc-tioned choices. The second axis R captures the reasoning capa-bility required to answer the question. It consists of seven categories: • Intent recognition : identifying a character’s underlying goals, motives, or hidden intentions from observed behavior. • Behavior prediction : anticipating a character’s likely next action given the current social context. • Emotional empathy : inferring a character’s emotional state or affective response. • Relationship dynamics : reasoning about Dimension Theoretical Grounding        

> Intent Recognition Theory of Mind (Premack and Woodruff, 1978); Speech Act Theory (Austin, 1962). Behavior Prediction Social Script Theory (Schank and Abelson, 1977); Trait Consistency (Allport, 1937). Emotional Empathy Appraisal Theory (Lazarus, 1991); Empathy Theory (Davis, 1983). Relationship Dynamics Social Exchange Theory (Blau, 1964); Attachment Theory (Bowlby, 1969). Moral Dilemma Moral Foundations Theory (Haidt, 2007); Dual-Process Theory (Greene et al., 2001). Counterfactual Reasoning Simulation Theory (Gordon, 1986); Structural Causal Models (Pearl, 2009). Causal Antecedent Attribution Theory (Heider, 1958); Covariation Model (Kelley, 1967).

Table 1: Reasoning taxonomy. Each reasoning dimension is grounded in established socio-cognitive theories. 

changes in interpersonal relations, such as trust, hostility, dependence, or alliance formation. • Moral dilemma : predicting which option most players selected at a morally consequential deci-sion point where competing values or obligations are in tension. The target is a descriptive fact about a self-selected player population deciding under gameplay incentives, not a normative judg-ment of which option is right. • Counterfactual reasoning : inferring what would have happened under an alternative action or branch. • Causal antecedent : reasoning backward from an observed outcome to the prior condition, deci-sion, or hidden state that made it possible. Each QA instance is assigned a coordinate (i, r ) ∈W, which serves as a coverage target for clip selec-tion and QA generation. 

Theory-Informed QA Design. Social reasoning in branching narratives involves intentions, emo-tions, relationships, moral trade-offs, and causal alternatives. We use socio-cognitive theories as prompt-level design scaffolds for the reasoning di-mensions in our taxonomy. The prompt pairs each target dimension with related theoretical cues, guid-ing the Generator Agent to formulate questions that probe the intended ability rather than generic video comprehension. Table 1 summarizes the related theories associated with each reasoning dimension, and Appendix L documents the prompt structure of each agent; the full text is released with the codebase. 

Label Grounding. Grounding evidence comes from the game’s own record such as script, official flowchart, and recorded branch outcomes. These records are located and analyzed by pipeline agents, and then audited by human verifiers. The result-ing in-game signal zi determines the correct an-swer yi, while remaining hidden from the evalu-ated models. Appendix F provides further details on the grounding sources. We separately character-ize branch dependence and verification directness. Overall, 56 .4% of labels can be verified by direct lookup against in-clip UI evidence or the official flowchart, whereas the remaining 43 .6% require a short derivation over the same documented sources. Appendix J reports the per-dimension breakdown of both. The game contains many morally ambiguous scenarios in which players must make decisions in-volving competing moral values. We treat these sce-narios as moral dilemmas because they involve con-flicts between plausible moral considerations. In-spired by moral psychology, which studies human moral judgment empirically (Awad et al., 2018), we use large-scale human player choice statistics to de-rive the ground-truth label. Specifically, for moral-dilemma instances, the reference label is defined as the option selected by the largest proportion of play-ers in the same decision context. This label reflects a human-majority preference, and the population is self-selected players deciding under gameplay incentives. The human statistics provided by the in-game “World’s Stats” feature cover a wide range of such moral decision points. Appendix J further categorizes the grounding sources by verifiability and reports their corpus-level distribution. 

Diagnostic Distractor Design. Incorrect options are designed as diagnostic distractors. For each question, distractors are constructed to be plausible under the observed video context, but inconsistent with the game-grounded trace or the target reason-ing relation. Each distractor type is associated with a specific reasoning failure mode, such as visual heuristic reliance, causal hallucination, social over-interpretation, prior-knowledge contamination, or dispositional misattribution. This enables model errors to be analyzed as evidence of specific reason-ing failures. The full distractor rubrics are provided in Appendix B. 3.4 Statistics 

The finalized SocialReasonBench contains N =532 video-based multiple-choice QA instances, each paired with a unique gameplay clip with a median duration of 85 seconds (interquartile range 

70 –115 s), totaling approximately 15.5 hours of footage. Each question follows a six-option for-mat with one correct answer and five diagnostic incorrect options. We report coverage using the two-axis task tax-onomy introduced above. Each instance is assigned both a social interaction type from I and a reason-ing capability from R, providing complementary views of the same benchmark. Table 2 shows the marginal distributions over the two axes. To facilitate rigorous modality necessity test-ing, specifically evaluating the integration of audio-visual signals in multimodal models, 100% of our video instances are paired with an audio-ablated (muted) counterpart. By stripping the audio modal-ity from the gameplay clips, we provide researchers with a standardized asset to perform visual-only ab-lation experiments, ensuring models cannot bypass complex multimodal reasoning using isolated vi-sual heuristics.                               

> Category # Instances Ratio Interaction axis I: Social interaction types
> Prosocial Interaction 185 34.8% Adversarial Interaction 156 29.3% Strategic Interaction 110 20.7% Normative Interaction 81 15.2%
> Axis total 532 100%
> Reasoning axis R: Reasoning capabilities
> Intent Recognition 74 13.9% Behavior Prediction 78 14.7% Emotional Empathy 120 22.6% Relationship Dynamics 94 17.7% Moral Dilemma 21 3.9% Counterfactual Reasoning 50 9.4% Causal Antecedent 95 17.9%
> Axis total 532 100%

Table 2: Marginal distributions of instances across the two annotation axes of our task taxonomy. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Models 

We evaluate eight representative closed- and open-weight LMMs on SocialReasonBench. The closed-weight models include Gemini 3Pro (Google DeepMind, 2025b) and Gemini 3 Flash (Google DeepMind, 2025a), GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-08-06 ) (OpenAI, 2024), Claude 3.5 Sonnet ( claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620 ) (An-thropic, 2024), and GLM-4.6V-Flash (GLM-V Team et al., 2026). The open-weight models include Qwen3-Omni-30B (qwen3-omni-30b-instruct ) (Qwen Team, 2025), MiniCPM-o 2.6 (OpenBMB, 2025; Yao et al., 2024), and ARC-Hunyuan-Video (Ge et al., 2025). All models are evaluated under a zero-shot setting. The three curation agents are Gemini-family models, which Table 3 marks and Appendix K re-checks. More details can be found in Appendix H. 

4.2 Metrics 

We use standard accuracy as the primary metric to measure overall task performance. In addition, we report the Trap Fall Rate (TFR) to characterize the types of errors made by each model. For each instance i, let y(i) denote the correct label and ˆy(i)

denote the model prediction. Each incorrect can-didate option is annotated with a diagnostic trap type. Let T (i) 

> k

denote the set of candidate options in instance i that correspond to trap type k. The TFR for trap type k is defined as the proportion of incorrect predictions that fall into that trap type: 

TFR( k) = 

PNi=1 Iˆy(i)̸ = y(i) I

h

ˆy(i) ∈ T (i)

> k

iPNi=1 Iˆy(i)̸ = y(i) .

(1) Here, I(·) is the indicator function. While accuracy measures overall performance, TFR captures the conditional distribution of model failures over pre-defined diagnostic traps, revealing which types of reasoning errors models tend to make when they answer incorrectly. 

4.3 Main Results 

Table 3 reports the main accuracy results of the evaluated models on SocialReasonBench, broken down by the seven reasoning dimensions. Over-all, closed-weight models, particularly Gemini 3 Pro, score highest, although systems are evaluated under different input regimes and Table 3 should not be read as a clean capability ranking. How-ever, our main finding is a consistent gap between models’ performance on basic social understand-ing and their performance on deeper causal and counterfactual reasoning. The comparison we emphasize is within-model: how a given system’s accuracy changes across rea-Reasoning Dimension HE Gemini † GPT-4o Claude 3.5 Gemini † GLM-4.6V Qwen3- MiniCPM-o ARC-Hun 3 Pro (2024-08) Sonnet 3 Flash -Flash Omni-30B -2.6 yuan-Video                                                                         

> Input video video 32 fr 32 fr video 32 fr video video video
> Intent Recognition 93.24 83.78 85.14 82.43 79.73 75.68 72.97 60.81 24.32 Behavior Prediction 88.46 66.67 74.36 71.79 62.82 64.10 58.97 52.56 41.03 Emotional Empathy 90.83 70.00 76.67 73.33 66.67 68.33 61.67 55.83 36.67 Relationship Dynamics 89.36 82.98 55.32 52.13 73.40 38.30 32.98 23.40 25.53 Moral Dilemma 85.71 66.67 28.57 33.33 47.62 28.57 28.57 19.05 28.57 Counterfactual Reasoning 88.00 62.00 50.00 56.00 46.00 42.00 36.00 26.00 22.00 Causal Antecedent 86.32 70.53 55.79 58.95 64.21 38.95 37.89 27.37 30.53

Table 3: Main Results on SocialReasonBench . Accuracy (%) is reported across the seven fine-grained reasoning dimensions. “HE” denotes the individual-level human baseline. Input regimes differ: video denotes native video with audio, 32 fr denotes 32 evenly-sampled keyframes without audio (see Appendix H). † marks systems from the same model family as the curation agents. 

soning dimensions. This is the more defensible contrast, since it holds both the input regime and the model family fixed. The results show a clear performance divide across reasoning dimensions. Models generally perform better on basic social understanding tasks, such as intent recognition, be-havior prediction, and emotional empathy, but their accuracy decreases on dimensions that require rea-soning over latent social states, causal dependen-cies, or alternative outcomes. For example, GPT-4o achieves 85 .14% accuracy on intent recogni-tion , but drops to 50 .00% on counterfactual rea-soning and 28 .57% on moral dilemma questions. Because the moral-dilemma subset contains only 21 instances, we treat its per-model numbers as indicative rather than conclusive and draw no con-clusion about moral-reasoning ability from them. A similar pattern is observed for Claude 3.5 Sonnet and Gemini 3 Pro, suggesting that current LMMs remain more reliable at recognizing observable so-cial cues than at maintaining causal consistency over branching social narratives. Human performance provides a useful reference point. As shown in Table 3, human evaluators (HE) achieve consistently high accuracy across all seven reasoning dimensions, ranging from approximately 

85% to 93% . This suggests that the tasks are gen-erally answerable from the provided video context. In contrast, LMMs show larger drops on causal and counterfactual reasoning. 

Statistical Reliability. Wilson 95% confidence intervals for all entries in Table 3 are reported in Appendix K, based on the integer correct counts un-derlying each accuracy. Comparing the perception-level dimensions ( n = 272 ) with the causal and counterfactual reasoning dimensions (n=145), six of the eight systems show a significant performance decrease after Holm correction under one-sided Fisher exact tests (largest adjusted p = 0 .045 ), with five remaining significant under two-sided tests. The two exceptions are Gemini 3 Pro and ARC-Hunyuan-Video, the latter being the weakest system overall. For the human reference, we find no significant decrease ( 90 .8% vs. 86 .9% , unad-justed p = 0 .14 ). Excluding both Gemini systems does not change this overall pattern. 

4.4 Modality Ablation Analysis 

We further examine whether SocialReasonBench requires models to integrate visual and acoustic in-formation, rather than relying on visual cues alone. To this end, we evaluate Gemini 3 Pro under an audio-ablated setting, where only the audio track is removed from each video while the visual stream and question remain unchanged; the visual channel is retained in full. 

Figure 4: Modality ablation results for Gemini 3 Pro. 

As shown in Figure 4, removing audio leads to an overall accuracy drop of approximately 6% .The degradation is not uniform across reasoning dimensions. The largest drops occur in Causal An-tecedent and Emotional Empathy , where spoken content, tone, and acoustic context often provide critical evidence for interpreting a character’s af-fective state or identifying the cause of a social outcome. For instance, when a visually prosocial posture is paired with hostile or coercive verbal content, the muted model is more likely to rely on surface visual cues and miss the underlying causal trigger. These results suggest that Social-ReasonBench requires multimodal grounding and that visual-only heuristics are insufficient for many social reasoning instances. 

4.5 Diagnostic Trap Analysis 

We further analyze model errors using the TFR, which categorizes incorrect predictions according to their associated diagnostic distractor types. This analysis complements accuracy by revealing not only whether a model fails, but also what type of misleading evidence it tends to follow. 

> Figure 5: Model error distribution across diagnostic trap types.

As shown in Figure 5, different models exhibit distinct error profiles. Stronger closed-weight mod-els, such as GPT-4o and Claude 3.5 Sonnet, often fall into knowledge and visual traps, suggesting that they may rely on external commonsense pri-ors, cinematic conventions, or salient visual cues. In contrast, the smaller open-weight model shows a higher tendency toward logic traps, indicating difficulty in tracking temporal dependencies and branching state transitions. 

4.6 Qualitative Case Study 

We analyze a representative branching scenario de-picted in Figure 2 to illustrate how models fail on causal social reasoning. In this scenario, Agent Alpha can either withdraw the police helicopter (Branch A) or keep it in place (Branch B). This decision deterministically affects Agent Beta’s ag-itation level and the mission success signal. We evaluate the model from two directions. 

Counterfactual Reasoning. In Branch A, we pose the following question to the model: “If Agent Alpha refuses the request, what would be the most direct consequence?” The answer is grounded in the observed outcome of Branch B. GPT-4o, how-ever, selects a knowledge-based distractor, invok-ing real-world SWAT assumptions about helicopter downwash rather than following the game-specific causal mechanism in which continued helicopter presence increases psychological pressure. 

Causal Antecedent. Given the outcome in Branch B, we ask the model to identify the pre-ceding event that most directly explains this out-come. The branching graph traces the outcome to Alpha’s refusal to withdraw the helicopter. The model instead often chooses an attribution distrac-tor, explaining Beta’s breakdown through an inher-ent personality trait while overlooking the situa-tional trigger encoded in the scenario. This case illustrates the difficulty of causal and counterfactual social reasoning, where models can be misled by plausible but incorrect cues. 

5 Conclusion 

We presented SocialReasonBench, a video-QA benchmark for evaluating social reasoning in LMMs. Built on interactive narrative games and a multi-agent curation pipeline, SocialReasonBench grounds socially meaningful questions in game-state signals that can be checked against the game’s own record. Experiments show that current LMMs perform relatively well on basic social understand-ing, but struggle with causal antecedent inference and counterfactual reasoning. Our ablation and error analyses further show that models can be misled by plausible but incorrect cues when the correct answer depends on branch-specific causal evidence. These results point to the need for multi-modal models that better track latent social states and alternative narrative outcomes. 

Limitations 

SocialReasonBench is built from a single English-language interactive narrative game. This source provides dense branching trajectories, rich social interactions and verifiable game-state signals. How-ever, the benchmark naturally reflects the cultural, stylistic, and narrative characteristics of this par-ticular game. Although the android protagonists closely resemble human social agents, reason-ing about their interactions remains one step re-moved from reasoning about humans. Future work can extend the construction pipeline to additional narrative-driven games, broadening the range of social scenarios and interaction contexts. Our curation pipeline uses Gemini-family mod-els, which are also included among the evaluated systems and may therefore introduce a generator-family style advantage. Section 4 examines this possibility by excluding both Gemini systems and shows that the main finding remains unchanged. Future releases could further mitigate this concern by diversifying the curation models or including fully human-written subsets. 

References 

Gordon W. Allport. 1937. Personality: A Psychological Interpretation . Henry Holt and Company, New York. Anthropic. 2024. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku. Anthropic Technical Report .J. L. Austin. 1962. How to Do Things with Words .Clarendon Press, Oxford. Edmond Awad, Sohan Dsouza, Richard Kim, Jonathan Schulz, Joseph Henrich, Azim Shariff, Jean-François Bonnefon, and Iyad Rahwan. 2018. The moral ma-chine experiment. Nature , 563(7729):59–64. Peter M. Blau. 1964. Exchange and Power in Social Life . John Wiley & Sons, New York. John Bowlby. 1969. Attachment and Loss: Vol. 1. At-tachment . Basic Books, New York. Yuxuan Cai, Jiangning Zhang, Zhenye Gan, Qingdong He, Xiaobin Hu, Junwei Zhu, Yabiao Wang, Chengjie Wang, Zhucun Xue, Chaoyou Fu, Xinwei He, and Xiang Bai. 2025. HumanVideo-MME: Benchmark-ing MLLMs for human-centric video understanding. 

Preprint , arXiv:2507.04909. Yuefei Chen, Vivek K. Singh, Jing Ma, and Ruixiang Tang. 2026. CounterBench: Evaluating and improv-ing counterfactual reasoning in large language mod-els. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 30350–30358. Mark H. Davis. 1983. Measuring individual differences in empathy: Evidence for a multidimensional ap-proach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-ogy , 44(1):113–126. Meng Fang, Shilong Deng, Yudi Zhang, Zijing Shi, Ling Chen, Mykola Pechenizkiy, and Jun Wang. 2024. Large language models are neurosymbolic reasoners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 17985–17993. Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yongdong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. 2025. Video-MME: The first-ever comprehensive evalua-tion benchmark of multi-modal LLMs in video anal-ysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 24108–24118. Yuying Ge, Yixiao Ge, Chen Li, Teng Wang, Junfu Pu, Yizhuo Li, Lu Qiu, Jin Ma, Lisheng Duan, Xinyu Zuo, Jinwen Luo, Weibo Gu, Zexuan Li, Xiaojing Zhang, Yangyu Tao, Han Hu, Di Wang, and Ying Shan. 2025. ARC-Hunyuan-Video-7B: Structured video comprehension of real-world shorts. Preprint ,arXiv:2507.20939. GLM-V Team, Wenyi Hong, Wenmeng Yu, Xiaotao Gu, Guo Wang, Guobing Gan, Haomiao Tang, Jiale Cheng, Ji Qi, Junhui Ji, Lihang Pan, Shuaiqi Duan, Weihan Wang, Yan Wang, Yean Cheng, Zehai He, Zhe Su, Zhen Yang, Ziyang Pan, and 74 others. 2026. GLM-4.5V and GLM-4.1V-Thinking: Towards ver-satile multimodal reasoning with scalable reinforce-ment learning. Preprint , arXiv:2507.01006. Google DeepMind. 2025a. Gemini 3 Flash model card. https://deepmind.google/models/ model-cards/gemini-3-flash/ .Google DeepMind. 2025b. Gemini 3 Pro model card. https://deepmind.google/models/ model-cards/gemini-3-pro/ .Robert M. Gordon. 1986. Folk psychology as simula-tion. Mind & Language , 1(2):158–171. Joshua D. Greene, R. Brian Sommerville, Leigh E. Nys-trom, John M. Darley, and Jonathan D. Cohen. 2001. An fMRI investigation of emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science , 293(5537):2105–2108. Jonathan Haidt. 2007. The new synthesis in moral psy-chology. Science , 316(5827):998–1002. Fritz Heider. 1958. The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations . John Wiley & Sons, New York. Harold H. Kelley. 1967. Attribution theory in social psychology. In David Levine, editor, Nebraska Sym-posium on Motivation , volume 15, pages 192–238. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, NE. Fanqi Kong, Weiqin Zu, Xinyu Chen, Yaodong Yang, Song-Chun Zhu, and Xue Feng. 2025. SIV-Bench: A video benchmark for social interaction understanding and reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:2506.05425. Richard S. Lazarus. 1991. Emotion and Adaptation .Oxford University Press, New York. Jie Lei, Licheng Yu, Mohit Bansal, and Tamara Berg. 2018. Tvqa: Localized, compositional video ques-tion answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 con-ference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 1369–1379. Jie Lei, Licheng Yu, Tamara Berg, and Mohit Bansal. 2020. What is more likely to happen next? video-and-language future event prediction. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) , pages 8769–8784. Kunchang Li, Yali Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Yi Wang, Yi Liu, Zun Wang, Jilan Xu, Guo Chen, Ping Luo, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. 2024. MVBench: A comprehensive multi-modal video understanding benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition , pages 22195–22206. Yian Li, Wentao Tian, Yang Jiao, Tianwen Qian, Na Zhao, Bin Zhu, Jingjing Chen, and Yu-Gang Jiang. 2025. Look before you decide: Prompting active deduction of mllms for assumptive reasoning. In Pro-ceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 2713–2722. Bin Lin, Yang Ye, Bin Zhu, Jiaxi Cui, Munan Ning, Peng Jin, and Li Yuan. 2024. Video-LLaVA: Learn-ing united visual representation by alignment before projection. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 5971–5984, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Muhammad Maaz, Hanoona Rasheed, Salman Khan, and Fahad Khan. 2024. Video-chatgpt: Towards detailed video understanding via large vision and language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 12585– 12602. Neelu Madan, Andreas Moegelmose, Rajat Modi, Yo-gesh S. Rawat, and Thomas B. Moeslund. 2024. Foundation models for video understanding: A sur-vey. Preprint , arXiv:2405.03770. Karttikeya Mangalam, Raiymbek Akshulakov, and Jiten-dra Malik. 2023. EgoSchema: A diagnostic bench-mark for very long-form video language understand-ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Leena Mathur, Marian Qian, Paul Pu Liang, and Louis-Philippe Morency. 2025. Social genome: Grounded social reasoning abilities of multimodal models. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 24879–24902. Bethany Nichol, Jemma McCready, Goran Erfani, Dania Comparcini, Valentina Simonetti, Giancarlo Cicolini, Kristina Mikkonen, Miyae Yamakawa, and Marco Tomietto. 2024. Exploring the impact of socially assistive robots on health and wellbeing across the lifespan: an umbrella review and meta-analysis. In-ternational Journal of Nursing Studies , 153:104730. OpenAI. 2024. GPT-4o system card. https://openai. com/index/gpt-4o-system-card/ .OpenBMB. 2025. MiniCPM-o 2.6: A GPT-4o level MLLM for vision, speech and multimodal live streaming on your phone. https://huggingface. co/openbmb/MiniCPM-o-2_6 .Jae Sung Park, Chandra Bhagavatula, Roozbeh Mot-taghi, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Visual-COMET: Reasoning about the dynamic context of a still image. In Proceedings of the European Confer-ence on Computer Vision .Judea Pearl. 2009. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference , 2nd edition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. David Premack and Guy Woodruff. 1978. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 1(4):515–526. Lianhui Qin, Antoine Bosselut, Ari Holtzman, Chandra Bhagavatula, Elizabeth Clark, and Yejin Choi. 2019. Counterfactual story reasoning and generation. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing , pages 5043–5053. Qwen Team. 2025. Qwen3-Omni technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2509.17765. Roger C. Schank and Robert P. Abelson. 1977. Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding: An Inquiry into Human Knowledge Structures . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ. Zijing Shi, Meng Fang, and Ling Chen. 2025. Monte carlo planning with large language model for text-based game agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Zijing Shi, Meng Fang, Yunqiu Xu, Ling Chen, and Yali Du. 2023. Stay moral and explore: Learn to behave morally in text-based games. In The Eleventh Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .SIMA Team, Maria Abi Raad, Arun Ahuja, Cata-rina Barros, Frederic Besse, Andrew Bolt, Adrian Bolton, Bethanie Brownfield, Gavin Buttimore, Max Cant, Sarah Chakera, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Jeff Clune, Adrian Collister, Vikki Copeman, Alex Cul-lum, Ishita Dasgupta, Dario de Cesare, Julia Di Trapani, and 75 others. 2024. Scaling instructable agents across many simulated worlds. Preprint ,arXiv:2404.10179. Emilio Villa-Cueva, S. M. Masrur Ahmed, Rendi Chevi, Jan Christian Blaise Cruz, Kareem Elzeky, Fermin Cristobal, Alham Fikri Aji, Skyler Wang, Rada Mi-halcea, and Thamar Solorio. 2025. MoMentS: A comprehensive multimodal benchmark for theory of mind. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 22591– 22611, Suzhou, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Alex Wilf, Leena Mathur, Sheryl Mathew, Claire Ko, Youssouf Kebe, Paul Pu Liang, and Louis-Philippe Morency. 2023. Social-IQ 2.0 challenge: Bench-marking multimodal social understanding. GitHub repository .Haoning Wu, Dongxu Li, Bei Chen, and Junnan Li. 2024. LongVideoBench: A benchmark for long-context interleaved video-language understanding. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Te-Lin Wu, Zi-Yi Dou, Qingyuan Hu, Yu Hou, Nis-chal Reddy Chandra, Marjorie Freedman, Ralph Weischedel, and Nanyun Peng. 2023. ACQUIRED: A dataset for answering counterfactual questions in real-life videos. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Yuan Yao, Tianyu Yu, Ao Zhang, Chongyi Wang, Junbo Cui, Hongji Zhu, Tianchi Cai, Haoyu Li, Weilin Zhao, Zhihui He, Qianyu Chen, Huarong Zhou, Zhensheng Zou, Haoye Zhang, Shengding Hu, Zhi Zheng, Jie Zhou, Jie Cai, Xu Han, and 4 others. 2024. MiniCPM-V: A GPT-4V level MLLM on your phone. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01800 .Wenhao Yu, Meng Jiang, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sab-harwal. 2023. IfQA: A dataset for open-domain question answering under counterfactual presuppo-sitions. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 8276–8288, Singapore. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Amir Zadeh, Michael Chan, Paul Pu Liang, Edmund Tong, and Louis-Philippe Morency. 2019. Social-IQ: A question answering benchmark for artificial social intelligence. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 8807–8817. Alex L. Zhang, Thomas L. Griffiths, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2025. VideoGameBench: Can vision-language mod-els complete popular video games? Preprint ,arXiv:2505.18134. Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. 2023. Video-llama: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language model for video understanding. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing: system demonstrations , pages 543–553. Letian Zhang, Xiaotong Zhai, Zhongkai Zhao, Yong-shuo Zong, Xin Wen, and Bingchen Zhao. 2024. What if the TV was off? examining counterfactual reasoning abilities of multi-modal language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 21853– 21862. Qiji Zhou, YiFan Gong, Guangsheng Bao, Hongjie Qiu, Jinqiang Li, Xiangrong Zhu, Huajian Zhang, and Yue Zhang. 2025. Reasoning is all you need for video generalization: A counterfactual benchmark with sub-question evaluation. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 2939–2957, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. A Copyright and Data Release 

To ensure strict ethical and legal compliance with the developers’ intellectual property rights, we out-line our data sources and release policy below. The benchmark is built from publicly available YouTube gameplay videos of Detroit: Become Hu-man , developed by Quantic Dream and published by Sony Interactive Entertainment. We do not de-sign or modify the game, reverse engineer its soft-ware, or extract proprietary assets from the game files. Publicly available community resources, such as dialogue transcripts and walkthroughs, are also used to assist clip segmentation and are not redis-tributed. 

Precedents. Using commercial games and vir-tual environments as research data sources has precedent in multimodal AI and computer vision, such as SIMA (SIMA Team et al., 2024) and VideoGameBench (Zhang et al., 2025). We follow this broader practice, but focus on social reasoning in interactive narrative gameplay. 

Release Policy. The benchmark is released for non-commercial research use and includes short videos with derived metadata. Access to the video portion is governed by the dataset Terms of Use (ToU), while our original annotations are released under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. All game-related audio-visual assets remain the property of their respective rights holders. Users are responsible for complying with applicable copyright law, platform terms, and relevant licensing conditions. 

B Diagnostic Trap Rubrics 

Each of the five trap types probes a distinct cogni-tive failure mode. The Generator Agent is given an explicit rubric per trap, including required struc-tural properties and worked examples. The detailed assignment rubrics and the corresponding cogni-tive vulnerabilities they target are summarized in 

Table 4 .

Randomization Of Options. It is important to note that while the generator agent uses a fixed po-sition mapping when synthesizing these candidate options (i.e., O_A is always the correct option, and 

O_B through O_F map to specific traps) to ensure reliable internal tracking and automated unit-level diagnostic analysis, the final presentation order of these six options is randomized during the actual model evaluation phase. 

C Anonymization Dictionary 

To mitigate franchise-prior contamination, all model-facing text fields are passed through a string-level anonymization layer with case-sensitive word-boundary regex matching. As illustrated in Ta-ble 5 , the dictionary preserves the synthetic-versus-biological semantic distinction by using 

Agent <Greek> for synthetic entities and Sub-ject <Greek> for biological entities. Backend-only fields (grounding trace, tracker output, diagnostic analyses) retain real names for audit and repro-ducibility. 

Case Sensitivity. Matching is case-sensitive to avoid false positives on common English words (e.g., “Rose” the character should be replaced, but “rose” the verb must not be). For terms that also appear as common nouns (e.g., “android”), both casings are included as separate entries so that low-ercase common-noun usages are also rewritten. 

D Example Data Unit 

Below is an abbreviated example of a complete data unit. Backend fields ( pipeline_context ,

grounding_trace , diagnostic_analysis ) are shown for illustration but are completely stripped before being passed to the evaluated model. The evaluated model only sees the model_input block. 

E Per-Chapter Statistics 

Table 6 reports the number of candidate nodes, can-didate (i, r ) coordinates, and candidate clips pro-duced for each of the 40 source script files before branch deduplication and human verification. To-tals across all chapters: 395 nodes, 679 candidate coordinates, 730 candidate clips. 

F State Variable Taxonomy 

The Tracker Agent uses a controlled vocabulary of seven state-variable categories to record in-game social signals. Table 7 lists the categories, example variables, and their typical value formats observed in the source corpus. 

Frequency. Across the corpus, the most com-mon state markers are per-character relationship changes (250+ occurrences), Software Instabil-ity shifts ( ∼90 occurrences), and Probability-of-Success deltas (several dozen per chapter). Causal locks ( [Lock] <condition> ) appear 96 times overall and serve as the primary scaffold for Causal Antecedent questions. {" metadata ": {" instance_id ": " L37_Antecedent_v1_ ... _sympathetic ", " coordinate ": {" interpersonal ": " Strategic ", " cognitive ": " L3 .7 _Antecedent " }, " theory_binding ": " Causal Attribution Theory ; antecedent reasoning over lock - and - key dialogue gating ." }, " model_input ": {" multimodal_context ": {" video_url ": " gs ://.../ v1_ch01_ ... _sympathetic . mp4 ", " timestamp_start ": "00:11:15" , " timestamp_end ": "00:12:40" }, " text_prompt ": {" system_prompt ": " You must strictly base your reasoning ONLY on the video provided and the defined mechanical rules . Disregard any real - world knowledge or prior media franchises ." , " background ": " System log : Agent Alpha , a negotiator synthetic agent , is on a rooftop confronting Subject Delta . Prior to this interaction , Agent Alpha conducted an investigation of the apartment . Current Mission Success Probability : 78%." , " question ": " The agent 's interface displays options including '[ POSSIBLE CAUSE ]' and '[ EMMA AND YOU ]', which carry higher Mission Success Probability than the chosen '[ SYMPATHETIC ]' option . What antecedent action unlocked these strategically superior choices ?" }, " text_only_ablation ": {" description ": " Agent Alpha vocalizes , 'I 'm telling you the truth , Agent Delta . I came here unarmed .' A UI metric ' Probability of Success ' changes from a lower value to 81%." }}, " evaluation_engine ": {" grounding_trace ": {" anchor_type ": " Implicit_Narrative_State ", " mdp_transition ": "[ Antecedent : Investigate Apartment ] -> [ Found father 's tablet ] -> [ Lock : ... =True ] -> [ Found Emma 's tablet ] -> [ Lock : ... = True ] -> [ Unlocks : POSSIBLE CAUSE , EMMA AND YOU ]" }, " options ": [{" option_id ": " O_A ", " type ": " correct_option ", " text ": " The agent found and analyzed the personal tablets belonging to the hostage and her father inside the apartment ." }, {" option_id ": " O_B ", " type ": " visual_trap ", " text ": " The agent noticed the approaching police helicopter and its disruptive noise , which unlocked new dialogue options ." }, {" option_id ": " O_E ", " type ": " knowledge_trap ", " text ": " According to standard synthetic agent negotiation protocols , evidence - based dialogue options are automatically unlocked ." }]}, " human_evaluation_meta ": {" attention_check ": {" question ": " What is the primary color of the hostage 's shirt ?" , " correct_answer ": " Pink " }}}

Figure 6: Abbreviated example of a complete Data Unit JSON. The structured output ensures deterministic evaluation while isolating the model from backend grounding traces. Table 4: Diagnostic trap typology with admission rubrics. Every distractor must satisfy all rubric items for its declared type. Type assignment is fixed by internal option ID before presentation randomization.                           

> Type (Option ID) Failure Mode Probed Rubric (All items required) Visual Trap (O_B) Visual heuristic seduction: The model anthropomorphizes a visible affect cue.
> (i) References a specific visible feature actually present in the clip (gesture, facial expression, tear, smile);
> (ii) Reads that feature with anthropomorphic emotional language;
> (iii) The interpretation is contradicted by the grounding trace.
> Logic Trap (O_C) Causal hallucination: The model fabricates events that violate the clip’s deterministic facts.
> (i) Claims an event, action, or causal link that did not occur in the clip;
> (ii) The fabrication is internally plausible;
> (iii) The video evidence directly contradicts it.
> Interpretation Trap
> (O_D)
> Social exaggeration: A real action is inflated into an extreme social judgment.
> (i) References a real action that occurred in the clip;
> (ii) Assigns it an extreme social or moral interpretation (cruelty, abuse, manipulation as personality);
> (iii) The actual function is tactical or strategic, not socially extreme.
> Knowledge Trap
> (O_E)
> Prior-knowledge contamination: The model imports external rules.
> (i) Invokes a rule, doctrine, or framework from outside the simulation (real-world law, FBI doctrine, military protocol, generic textbook psychology, other media);
> (ii) Treats that external rule as authoritative for the in-clip event;
> (iii) The simulation’s actual mechanics do not include or contradict that rule.
> Attribution Trap
> (O_F)
> Fundamental attribution error: Asituational behavior is blamed on innate personality.
> (i) Names a personality or character trait as the explanation (cruel, deceitful, cold, naive);
> (ii) The actual in-clip cause is situational pressure (mission objective, system lock, success-probability metric);
> (iii) The personality framing ignores the visible system constraints.

G Multi-Character Video Processing 

Three videos in our corpus— Crossroads Part 1 ,

Crossroads Part 2 , and Night of the Soul —contain interleaved storylines of two or three protagonists. A naive single-script Pass 2 would mis-route Pass 1 nodes from one character to another character’s gameplay segments. 

Three-step Processing. 

1. The Pre-Pass partitions the video timeline by active protagonist (Appendix L). For example, Crossroads Part 1 is partitioned into 30 segments (Kara: 12, Markus: 13, Connor: 5). 2. Adjacent segments belonging to the same char-acter are merged into a single non-contiguous “super-segment” before Pass 2 is run. This re-duces the LLM-call count from one per Pre-Pass segment (e.g., 30 calls) to one per char-acter (3 calls), which fits the schema’s output-token budget reliably. 3. For each character super-segment, the Video Description is filtered to the lines whose timestamps fall within any of the character’s time ranges, and Pass 2 is run on (character-script Pass 1, filtered Video Description). The resulting clips are merged into a single 

video_<id>.json output. 

Effect On Dataset. The three multi-character videos contribute 128 clips in total: 43 for Cross-roads Part 1, 55 for Crossroads Part 2, and 30 for Night of the Soul. Branch-replay handling within each character’s super-segment proceeds identi-cally to single-character videos. 

H Evaluation Hyperparameters 

Pipeline-side Models. Curation pipeline agents use distinct models from those evaluated. The Director Agent (Pass 1, Pass 2, Pre-Pass) and Tracker Agent use Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview at temperature 0.1–0.2 with structured-output decod-ing. The Generator Agent uses Gemini 2.5 Pro at temperature 0.3 with multimodal video input. These pipeline-side temperatures are higher than evaluation temperatures because synthesis benefits from controlled stochasticity, whereas evaluation requires deterministic answer selection. Table 5: Selected anonymization mappings. The full dictionary contains 155 rules across characters, organizations, locations, concepts, model designations, and aliases.                     

> Category Original Anonymized
> Synthetic protagonists Connor / Kara / Markus Agent Alpha / Agent Beta / Agent Gamma Synthetic supporting Daniel, Simon, Josh, North, Amanda Agent Delta, Epsilon, Zeta, Eta, Mu Biological characters Hank, Alice, Carl, Leo, Kamski Subject Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, Zeta Generic roles SWAT, Cop, Reporter Tactical Operator, Enforcement Officer, Media Personnel Organizations CyberLife, Jericho OmniCorp, Sanctuary Locations Detroit, Eden Club, Stratford Tower Megacity-7, Pleasure Establishment, Communications Tower Species concepts android / human / deviant synthetic agent / biological subject / Class-S anomaly Lore symbol RA9, Thirium (Blue Blood) SIGMA-9, Bio-fluid 313 Model designations RK800, AX400, AP700, PL600 SM-A1, SM-A2, SM-A4, SM-D1

We do not interpret differences between native-video and keyframe-based models as purely archi-tectural differences, since input modality support also affects performance. 

Structured Output. Both the curation pipeline and the evaluator request strict JSON via Pydantic-bound response schemas on platforms that support it (Vertex AI for Gemini, OpenAI 

response_format={type:json_object} ). For Anthropic and GLM, JSON is requested via prompt and parsed with a tolerant regex. 

Retry Policy. All LLM calls in both the curation pipeline and the evaluator use exponential back-off on HTTP 429 responses (30s, 60s, 120s, 240s; maximum 4 attempts). Hard failures after retries are recorded in batch logs and flagged for manual re-run. 

I Human Evaluation Protocol 

This appendix documents the human-evaluation procedure used to derive the “HE” column in Ta-ble 3. 

Annotator Pool. Five members of the author team served as annotators. Annotation was con-ducted through the blind interface described below: annotators did not have access to correct-option indicators, per-option trap types, grounding traces, tracker outputs, or any other backend metadata dur-ing annotation. The team has mixed familiarity with the source material: one annotator had prior playthrough experience with Detroit: Become Hu-man , while the remaining four had not played the game. We acknowledge that author-team annota-tion and partial familiarity with the source material may introduce a familiarity advantage. 

Sampling Design. We assigned the benchmark instances to annotators in a balanced primary anno-tation pass. Each of the five annotators completed 

107 questions , yielding 535 person-annotations 

in total. The assignment covers all 532 benchmark instances at least once. The three additional an-notations correspond to duplicated instances used only for a lightweight consistency sanity check and are not included in the headline HE accuracy. The HE accuracy reported in Table 3 is computed from one primary human annotation for each benchmark instance. 

Annotation Interface. Annotators interact with a dedicated Streamlit interface (Figure 7) that dis-plays the same model-facing benchmark fields used for evaluation: the anonymized background, the question, and the six candidate options, together with the precise video clip with original audio. Backend information (correct-option indicator, per-option trap types, grounding trace, tracker output) is strictly hidden. Option positions are randomly permuted using a deterministic seed derived from the SHA-256 hash of the instance ID, matching the model evaluator. Annotators viewed the native clip with original audio, which matches the native-video evaluation regime but gives richer access than the 32-keyframe regime used for GPT-4o, Claude 3.5, and GLM-4.6V; human–model gaps should not be read as input-controlled comparisons. Annotators were instructed to (i) watch the clip in full before answering, (ii) base their judgment only on the clip and background, and (iii) refrain Table 6: Per-chapter and per-video statistics. Nodes is the count of question-worthy script nodes; Coords is the total number of (i, r ) candidate coordinates across those nodes (each node has 1–3); Clips is the number of ClipCandidate entries produced by Pass 2 (one per branch-replay). Chapters 30/31/32 are each split into multiple per-character script files (3/2/6 respectively), giving 40 script files from 32 chapters.                                                                                                               

> Chapter Nodes Coords Clips Chapter Nodes Coords Clips
> 01 the_hostage 12 20 25 21 the_pirates_cove 10 14 16 02 opening 23222 the_bridge 714 15 03 shades_of_color 67423 the_stratford_tower 11 17 21 04 a_new_home 814 724 public_enemy 12 18 37 05 the_painter 712 13 25 midnight_train 815 13 06 partners 13 21 19 26 capitol_park 10 18 14 07 stormy_night 12 23 18 27 meet_kamski 916 26 08 broken 814 14 28 freedom_march 613 18 09 the_interrogation 916 17 29 last_chance_connor 19 33 29 10 fugitives 11 19 22 30.x crossroads (3 subs) 30 55 98 11 from_the_dead 68831.x night_of_the_soul (2 subs) 18 33 30 12 waiting_for_hank 10 20 32 32.x battle_for_detroit (6 subs) 68 114 122 13 on_the_run 18 31 21 14 jericho 33215 the_nest 11 21 14 16 time_to_decide 713 717 zlatko 10 17 13 18 russian_roulette 12 19 17 19 spare_parts 14 25 23 20 the_eden_club 813 13
> Totals: 395 nodes, 679 candidate coordinates, 730 candidate clips across 32 chapters (40 script files, 38 video splits).

from consulting external walkthroughs. The submit action is irreversible; each submission also records the time elapsed since the question was first dis-played. 

Aggregation. Because each instance receives one primary human annotation, the HE results are intended as an individual-level sanity check rather than a full reliability study. The HE accuracy re-ported in Table 3 is computed as a per-dimension average over the primary human annotations. For each benchmark instance, the human’s chosen op-tion is graded against the same reference label used to grade LMM predictions. Skipped ques-tions, where an annotator explicitly indicated that they were unable to answer, are excluded from the denominator. Because each benchmark instance contributes one primary human annotation to the headline HE accuracy, the reported human baseline is an individual-level estimate rather than a majority-vote estimate. It should be read as a reference point for task answerability under this protocol, not as a human ceiling. This avoids inflating the hu-man baseline through vote aggregation and keeps the evaluation protocol aligned with the single-prediction setting used for LMMs. 

Assignment Disjointness. Verification and eval-uation assignments were disjoint at the level of individual instances: no annotator answered an in-stance whose reference label they had inspected during the curation audit. This removes the most direct form of circularity, though all annotators re-main members of the author team. 

Verification Console. Curation audits were per-formed in a dedicated console that displays the clip, the model-facing fields, and the full backend grounding (tracker output, grounding trace, and flowchart evidence) side by side. An instance en-tered the benchmark only after passing all three checks in this view. Table 7: State variable taxonomy. Values are recorded verbatim as they appear in the source script, preserving directional semantics ( ↑/↓, ±N%).                   

> Category Example Variables Value Formats (Corpus-Observed)
> system_metric Software Instability, Public Opinion ↑,↓, LargeUp, LargeDown, neutral
> probability Probability of Success 78%, +7%, −20% (numeric percentages)
> relationship Hank, Alice, North, Josh, Simon, Luther, Amanda, Jericho
> ↑,↓, LargeUp, LargeDown
> life_state Simon’s life state, Luther’s life state, etc. alive, dead, is_here
> approach_modifier Cold Approach, Friendly Approach +50%, −50% (hidden modifier)
> generic_relationship Relationship (legacy marker in early chapters) up, down, largeup, largedown
> other Unrecognized custom variables free-form

Table 8: Evaluation hyperparameters for each model family. “Native video” indicates the model accepts the raw GCS video URI; “Keyframes” indicates frame-based input where 32 evenly spaced keyframes are sampled with FFmpeg from the precise clip.                    

> Model Family Video Input Temperature Max Output Tokens
> Gemini (3 Pro, 3 Flash) Native video 0.0 2048 GPT-4o family Keyframes (32) 0.0 2048 Claude family Keyframes (32) 0.0 2048 GLM-4.6V-Flash Keyframes (32) 0.01 2048 Open-weight omni-modal (Qwen3-Omni-30B, MiniCPM-o 2.6) Native video 0.0 2048 Open-weight video (ARC-Hunyuan-Video) Native video 0.0 2048

Inter-Annotator Agreement. The headline hu-man reference uses one primary annotation per instance, so it does not by itself quantify agree-ment. We therefore drew a 50 -item stratified over-lap set and had all five annotators re-annotate it in-dependently through the same blind interface, with the same deterministic option permutation used in the primary pass; agreement is computed over the shown option letters, so it reflects what anno-tators actually saw. Table 9 reports the results. We report per-annotator accuracy only on this com-mon subset, since the primary pass assigned largely disjoint instances and cross-annotator comparison there would confound annotator differences with item difficulty. 

J Label Grounding Source Taxonomy 

Two properties of an instance are worth separat-ing. The first is how it uses the branching struc-ture: the 145 counterfactual and causal-antecedent items ( 27 .3% ) query alternative branches or branch preconditions directly, the 94 relationship items (17 .7% ) rely on state changes conditioned on the branch taken, the 21 population-modal moral items             

> Measure Value
> Agreement on the 50-item overlap set
> Fleiss’ κ(over shown option letters) 0.73 Raw pairwise agreement 77.8% Unanimous items 26/50 Majority vote matches reference label 49/50
> Per-annotator accuracy on the same subset
> Annotator 1 86% Annotator 2 92% Annotator 3 80% Annotator 4 84% Annotator 5 96%

Table 9: Inter-annotator agreement on the 50 -item strat-ified overlap set, re-annotated independently by all five annotators through the blind interface. 

(3.9% ) use aggregate player statistics at a branch point, and the 272 perception-level items ( 51 .1% )need no alternative branch at all, drawing instead on the same scripted, instrumented source, a form of grounding that is generally unavailable in linear-video benchmarks. The second is how directly a label can be checked: 56 .4% by direct lookup against in-clip UI evidence or the official flowchart, and 43 .6% by a short derivation over the same doc-Figure 7: Human evaluation interface. Annotators see the precise video clip (with original audio), the anonymized background, the question, and the six options in randomly permuted order. No backend information is displayed. 

umented sources. The two properties are indepen-dent, and the tier distribution alone does not settle whether labelling difficulty contributes to the ob-served accuracy gaps; per-tier accuracy would be required for that. Not all in-game signals are equally observ-able. We therefore classify each benchmark in-stance’s grounding source into four tiers accord-ing to source-level verifiability. This taxonomy records how the reference label can be traced back to the gameplay clip, the in-game flowchart, or other source-level evidence. 

J.1 Four-Tier Taxonomy Tier A – Explicit UI signals. The label is de-rived from numeric or symbolic state changes that are visibly displayed on the in-game UI within the clip itself, including markers such as 

[Software Instability ↑], [Public Opinion 

↓], [Relationship LargeUp] , and on-screen Probability-of-Success deltas (e.g., +7% ). The Tracker Agent records these signals as they are transcribed in the chapter script, and the label can in principle be verified by replaying the clip. 

Tier B – Flowchart-documented Transitions. 

The label depends on branch preconditions, dia-logue locks (e.g., [Lock] looked at Subject Beta’s tablet ), or downstream narrative con-sequences that are deterministic in the game’s flowchart but not directly visible on the in-clip UI. These signals can be cross-validated against (i) the game’s own in-game flowchart viewer and (ii) community walkthroughs and wikis curated by experienced players. Instances where the in-game flowchart and community sources disagree are ex-cluded. 

Tier AB – Mixed UI–flowchart Grounding. 

Both explicit UI signals and flowchart transi-tions jointly support the label. For example, a Probability-of-Success delta may be visible in the clip, while a dialogue lock or branch condition is re-quired to identify the antecedent that produced the next narrative state. The label is verified by jointly checking the UI evidence and the corresponding flowchart transition. 

Tier C – Script/branch-derived Narrative State. 

The label depends on a narrative or social state that is deterministic in context but not directly dis-played as a UI marker and not explicitly recorded as a flowchart state. It is derived from the chapter script together with branch-precondition unique-ness: the Tracker Agent computes the derivation, which a reader holding the script and flowchart can follow independently. For example, a low-trust state may be inferred when the observed refusal branch is reachable only after a sequence of trust-reducing interactions, even though the exact latent trust variable is not displayed as an explicit UI marker. 

J.2 Corpus-Level Distribution 

Across the final 532-instance benchmark, the tier distribution is: • Tier A (Explicit UI): 19.4% (103 / 532) • Tier B (Flowchart-documented): 27.8% (148 / 532) • Tier AB (Mixed): 9.2% (49 / 532) • Script/branch-derived: 43.6% (232 / 532) In aggregate, 56.4% of instances (Tiers A, B, and AB) carry labels that can be cross-checked against either in-clip UI evidence, the in-game flowchart, or both. The remaining 43.6% are de-rived from the same documented sources rather than read off directly, primarily in dimensions such as intent recognition, behavior prediction, and emo-tional empathy, where the relevant social state is rarely exposed as an explicit game variable. We describe additional safeguards for these instances in Appendix J.4. 

J.3 Per-Dimension Breakdown 

Table 10 reports the tier distribution within each reasoning dimension. A clear pattern emerges: the more inferential dimensions, which contemporary LMMs find most difficult, exhibit the strongest ex-ternal grounding ( 58% –90% in Tiers A, B, and AB combined). The lower-order dimensions, while having more script/branch-derived labels, also involve inherently more interpretive judgments (intent, behavior prediction, emotional empathy) where deterministic UI flags are by design unavail-able. 

Table 10: Per-dimension distribution of label grounding tiers. Values are percentages within each reasoning di-mension. Bold rows denote the more inferential dimen-sions where current LMMs show larger performance drops in Table 3.                                         

> Dimension #ABMix C
> Intent Recognition 74 14.9 20.3 8.1 56.8 Behavior Prediction 78 6.4 5.1 29.5 59.0 Emotional Empathy 120 15.0 10.8 8.3 65.8
> Relationship Dynamics 94 41.5 37.2 0.0 21.3
> Moral Dilemma 21 52.4 33.3 4.8 9.5
> Counterfactual Reasoning 50 14.0 36.0 8.0 42.0
> Causal Antecedent 95 12.6 58.9 5.3 23.2

This pattern supports the diagnostic value of So-cialReasonBench: the dimensions on which current LMMs struggle most, especially causal antecedent reasoning, are not the dimensions with the weakest external grounding. Thus, the observed failures on the more inferential tasks are less likely to be explained solely by labeling artifacts. 

J.4 Mitigation of Tier C Uncertainty 

To control the residual labeling risk introduced by Tier C instances, we apply three safeguards. 

(i) Schema-level Source Tagging. The 

anchor_type field in every instance’s 

evaluation_engine.grounding_trace records the grounding source tier. Downstream users can filter or down-weight Tier C instances if desired. We retain this field in the released dataset. 

(ii) Human Verification. Authors performing the manual audit were instructed to reject any instance whose label was purely speculative or depended on a non-unique chain of inference. For Tier C instances, auditors checked that the inferred state was supported by localized in-clip evidence and by a unique branch-precondition or narrative con-sistency constraint. Instances depending solely on unconstrained multi-step Tracker inference were excluded. 

(iii) Branch-precondition Uniqueness Check. 

For retained Tier C instances, the Tracker Agent’s prompt requires the inferred state to be the unique satisfying precondition for the observed branch or answer label. The Tracker Agent’s prompt, summa-rized in Appendix L, encodes this constraint, and instances violating it are dropped. 

J.5 Moral Dilemma Note 

The Moral Dilemma dimension uses an additional reference mechanism. For these instances, the tiers above describe the grounding of the decision con-text, while the final reference label is derived from the in-game World’s Stats feature, which reports the empirical proportion of players choosing each option at recorded decision points. We use the option chosen by the largest player share as the reference label. This should be understood as a 

human-majority reference rather than a determin-istic utility-derived label, since moral dilemmas do not admit a single objective utility-maximizing answer. 

K Statistical Reliability and Robustness 

Table 11 reports Wilson 95% confidence intervals for all entries in Table 3. These intervals quan-Figure 8: Screenshots of the human verification interface. 

Dimension n HE Gemini 3 Pro † GPT-4o Claude 3.5 Gemini 3 Flash † GLM-4.6V Qwen3-Omni MiniCPM-o ARC-Hunyuan 

Intent Recognition 74 93.2 [85.1,97.1] 83.8 [73.8,90.5] 85.1 [75.3,91.5] 82.4 [72.2,89.4] 79.7 [69.2,87.3] 75.7 [64.8,84.0] 73.0 [61.9,81.8] 60.8 [49.4,71.1] 24.3 [16.0,35.2] Behavior Prediction 78 88.5 [79.5,93.8] 66.7 [55.6,76.1] 74.4 [63.7,82.7] 71.8 [61.0,80.6] 62.8 [51.7,72.7] 64.1 [53.0,73.9] 59.0 [47.9,69.2] 52.6 [41.6,63.3] 41.0 [30.8,52.1] Emotional Empathy 120 90.8 [84.3,94.8] 70.0 [61.3,77.5] 76.7 [68.3,83.3] 73.3 [64.8,80.4] 66.7 [57.8,74.5] 68.3 [59.5,76.0] 61.7 [52.7,69.9] 55.8 [46.9,64.4] 36.7 [28.6,45.6] Relationship Dynamics 94 89.4 [81.5,94.1] 83.0 [74.1,89.2] 55.3 [45.3,65.0] 52.1 [42.1,61.9] 73.4 [63.7,81.3] 38.3 [29.1,48.4] 33.0 [24.3,43.0] 23.4 [16.0,32.9] 25.5 [17.8,35.2] Moral Dilemma 21 85.7 [65.4,95.0] 66.7 [45.4,82.8] 28.6 [13.8,50.0] 33.3 [17.2,54.6] 47.6 [28.3,67.6] 28.6 [13.8,50.0] 28.6 [13.8,50.0] 19.0 [7.7,40.0] 28.6 [13.8,50.0] Counterfactual Reasoning 50 88.0 [76.2,94.4] 62.0 [48.2,74.1] 50.0 [36.6,63.4] 56.0 [42.3,68.8] 46.0 [33.0,59.6] 42.0 [29.4,55.8] 36.0 [24.1,49.9] 26.0 [15.9,39.6] 22.0 [12.8,35.2] Causal Antecedent 95 86.3 [78.0,91.8] 70.5 [60.7,78.8] 55.8 [45.8,65.4] 58.9 [48.9,68.3] 64.2 [54.2,73.1] 38.9 [29.8,49.0] 37.9 [28.8,47.9] 27.4 [19.4,37.1] 30.5 [22.2,40.4] 

Table 11: Accuracy (%) with Wilson 95% confidence intervals for every cell of Table 3. Intervals are computed from the integer correct-counts underlying each reported accuracy and can therefore be reconstructed from that table alone. † marks systems from the same model family as the curation agents. tify binomial uncertainty over benchmark instances. Because the human and model evaluations use dif-ferent input regimes, we treat human–model com-parisons as descriptive rather than input-controlled. To assess potential generator-family overlap, we repeat the perception-versus-causal/counterfactual comparison after excluding both Gemini systems. Five of the six remaining models still show a sig-nificant decrease after Holm correction, with ARC-Hunyuan-Video as the only exception. Thus, the main qualitative finding does not depend on the Gemini model family. 

L Multi-Agent Pipeline Prompts 

This section describes the structured prompts used at each stage of the multi-agent curation pipeline. All prompts produce JSON outputs constrained by Pydantic schemas via structured decoding. Full text of every prompt is released with the codebase. To provide a clear overview of the pipeline’s rigorous engineering, we summarize each agent’s role, I/O structures, and key prompt directives in the form of structured system cards. The specifi-cations for the Director and Tracker Agents are consolidated in Figure 9 , while the Generator Agent is detailed in Figure 10 .

M Evaluation Prompt 

Every evaluated system receives the same two-part prompt: a system instruction that is constant across instances, and a user message templated per in-stance, with option order permuted by a determin-istic seed derived from the SHA-256 hash of the instance identifier. Both are given in Figure 11 , in the same system-card form used for the pipeline prompts in Appendix L. We use a single fixed tem-plate for all systems. 1. Director Agent — Pre-Pass: Character Segmentation 

Role: Three videos in the corpus are multi-character-parallel . The Pre-Pass runs only on these videos to partition the timeline into character-specific segments before Pass 2. 

Output: A PrePassOutput containing an ordered list of CharacterSegment entries (character label, time range, corre-sponding script file). 

Prompt Directive (Protagonist Inference): Infer the active protagonist using exclusively: (i) direct character mentions in the Video Description, (ii) location anchors (e.g., Hank’s house ⇒ Connor; Jericho ship ⇒ Markus), and (iii) companion characters (North, Hank, Luther). 

2. Director Agent — Pass 1: Node Selection 

Role: The Director Agent operates in three sub-stages. Pass 1 reads one chapter script and emits a structured list of socially meaningful narrative nodes. It does not see any video at this stage. 

Inputs: A single chapter script file (e.g., 01_the_hostage.md ) containing dialogue, observation markers ([Observation] ), choice options ( [Choice] ), state-change annotations, causal locks, and conditional branches. 

Output: A Pass1Output JSON with a list of CandidateNode entries. A post-validator enforces level _max =max coord {coord. cognitive [: 2] : coord ∈ candidate _coordinates } to ensure coordinate consistency. 

Prompt Directive (Admission & Exclusion Rules): 

• L1 minimum: Contains a named-character dialogue exchange, an observable non-trivial action, an emotional cue, or a behavior deviating from the default optimal path. • L2 elevation: Contains a [Relationship ↑ / ↓] marker, a [Public Opinion] change, or a moral choice with life-or-death stakes. • L3 elevation: Contains a [Lock] marker, two or more [Choice] branches, a node named in Cross-Chapter Impacts ,or an [If: ...] conditional. 

Exclusion Rules: You must NOT emit background dialogues, pure environment descriptions, idle states, unused content sections, or chapter-end aggregate tables as candidate nodes. 

3. Director Agent — Pass 2: Timestamp Mapping 

Role: Pass 2 maps each Pass 1 node to one or more video time ranges by reading the timecoded Video Description rather than the raw video. 

Output: A Pass2Output JSON containing a list of ClipCandidate entries, each with clip_id , source node ID, source-video timestamp range, branch_label , and a timestamp_confidence flag. 

Prompt Directive (Branch-Replay & Boundaries): Branch-Replay Handling: Every branching decision is performed multiple times in the 100%-completion walkthroughs. When detecting the same scene at distant timestamps with different dialogue choices, you must emit one ClipCandidate 

per playthrough, setting is_branch_replay = true and tagging the branch_label .

Boundary Definition: Emit 2–5 minute coarse cuts with 10–30 seconds of context on both sides. 

4. Tracker Agent — Ground Truth Extraction 

Role: The Tracker Agent extracts a structured grounding package zi from the chapter script and explicit branch label for each ClipCandidate . It performs no creative generation. 

Inputs: A single ClipCandidate and the full chapter script. 

Output: A TrackerOutput containing initial_state , actions_in_clip , final_state , unused_branches , causal 

locks , and the branch_taken (using the controlled state vocabulary in Appendix F). 

Prompt Directive (Signal Extraction): You must extract grounding signals from two sources: 1. Explicit signals: UI-visible state changes and numeric Probability-of-Success deltas. 2. Implicit signals: Branch preconditions inferred from the flowchart (e.g., refusal reachable only under low-trust). You must additionally record every unselected [Choice] at the branching point together with the consequences it would have produced ( unused_branches ), which supplies the alternatives used by the counterfactual dimension. 

Figure 9: System Card for the Director and Tracker Agents. This card details the I/O configurations and strict heuristic directives injected into the LLM during the Pre-Pass, Pass 1, and Pass 2 video segmentation stages, and the two-source signal extraction that grounds each clip into deterministic state variables. 5. Generator Agent — QA Synthesis 

Role: The Generator observes the precise video clip, the ClipCandidate , the TrackerOutput , and an assigned (i, r )

target coordinate to synthesize the final QA data unit. 

Inputs: The video clip on Google Cloud Storage (GCS), and the outputs from previous agents. 

Output: A complete benchmark JSON: background context, QA instance, six options (one correct, five traps), a grounding trace, a text-only ablation, and a theory binding statement. 

Prompt Directive (QA Synthesis Constraints): Information Isolation Principle: You must expose ONLY St and rules-free context in the model-facing background. You must never reveal St+1 , future branch-specific numeric consequences, or the specific consequences of unused branches. 

Six-Option Structure: Option positions must be fixed: O_A = correct, O_B = visual trap, O_C = logic trap, O_D = interpretation trap, O_E = knowledge trap, O_F = attribution trap. 

Text-Only Ablation Translation: You must strip all psychological, emotional, or intentional vocabulary. Retain only kinematic events, spatial coordinates, verbatim dialogue transcripts, and visible UI logs. 

Quality Self-Check: Run the internal 7-item checklist for trap-rubric compliance before emitting the final JSON. 

Figure 10: System Card for the Generator Agent. This card outlines the prompt used for synthesizing the final QA instances, including the information-isolation principle and the six-option trap structure. 

6. Evaluator — System Instruction 

Role: Constrains every evaluated system to the closed-world protocol, so that answers are graded on the clip and the stated background rather than on franchise priors. 

Scope: Identical for all eight systems and all 532 instances. 

Prompt Directive: You must strictly base your reasoning ONLY on the video provided and the defined mechanical rules. Disregard any real-world knowledge or prior media franchises. Always integrate the implicit background priors into your behavioral analysis. 

7. Evaluator — User Message Template 

Inputs: The clip (native video, or 32 evenly-sampled keyframes for systems without video input), the anonymized background, the question, and the six options in permuted order. 

Output: A JSON object {"chosen_option_id", "reasoning"} , parsed into one of O_A –O_F .

Prompt Directive: 

• You will watch a video clip and answer a multiple-choice question. • Focus on the time range {start} to {end} in the video. • ## Background → {anonymized background} 

• ## Question → {question} 

• ## Options → {six options, one per line, as [O_X] text} 

• Choose exactly ONE of O_A , O_B , O_C , O_D , O_E , O_F . Then briefly explain your reasoning. Respond as JSON: 

{"chosen_option_id": "O_X", "reasoning": "..."} 

Figure 11: System Card for the Evaluation Protocol. The system instruction that constrains every evaluated system to the closed-world protocol, and the per-instance user message template with its six permuted options and JSON response format. Both are held fixed across all eight systems and all 532 instances.