Title: Unsupervised Causal Abstractions Discovery

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19594v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 00:13:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Unsupervised Causal Abstractions Discovery 

Théo Saulus 1,2 Simon Lacoste-Julien 1,2,3 Dhanya Sridhar 1,2,3 1 Mila - Quebec AI Institute  

> 2

Université de Montréal  

> 3

Canada CIFAR AI Chair 

# Abstract 

Causal abstractions formalize when a high-level structural causal model (SCM) captures the inter-ventional behavior of a lower-level SCM. Exist-ing applications of this notion largely follow a hypothesis-testing paradigm: an expert proposes a candidate high-level model and then evaluates if the low-level system implements it. We study the complementary problem of learning a high-level model directly from low-level measurements. Our contributions leverage hypotheses from low-rank causal discovery, and can be summarized as fol-lows: (1) we show that observations generated by a low-rank graph induce latents that form a causal abstraction, (2) we provide identifiability results about these latents, and (3) we propose a practical objective to learn this high-level SCM. 

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

Complex systems can be described at different levels of abstraction: from low-level measurements about the system, one can form high-level summaries of its behavior. For ex-ample, we can record the neural activity of an individual performing a given task, and group the neurons by the stim-uli they respond to, yielding a coarse description in terms of functional groups rather than individual neurons. However, many scientific queries are about predicting the effects of interventions, such as "what happens if we ac-tivate this part of the brain?". Addressing such questions requires causal abstractions [Beckers and Halpern, 2019, Rubenstein et al., 2017]: put informally for now, a causal abstraction encodes at the high-level the effects of some interventions of interest on low-level variables, satisfying a form of consistency. In mechanistic interpretability, this viewpoint motivates hy-pothesis testing methods where one proposes a candidate high-level model and checks whether it is implemented by a deep neural network (DNN) [Geiger et al., 2021, 2024, Wu et al., 2023]. The underlying hope is that once we know the high-level computations the DNN implements, we can translate interventions on high-level variables into corre-sponding interventions on neurons to steer the model behav-ior. However, enumerating over candidate abstractions to test is costly, and worse, not possible when we study sys-tems that we do not fully understand (for example, a DNN trained to solve protein folding). Motivated by these appli-cations in interpretability and steering, this paper is about the unsupervised discovery of such causal abstractions. Unsupervised objectives are typically under-specified and admit many equivalent solutions, thus requiring further con-straints or assumptions. In this work, we discover causal abstractions for a family of low-level systems whose graphs exhibit a low-rank structure. Specifically, we consider fac-tor directed acyclic graphs (factor DAGs, or f-DAGs), a family of models over low-level variables that are parame-terized by a small number of latent factors, as introduced by Lopez et al. [2022]. This low-rank assumption is well-suited to modeling cell or neural biology where many low-level variables like genes or neurons carry out similar functions. Likewise in DNNs, because they perform computations in a distributed way, neurons are also likely to cluster into groups that capture the same abstract “concept” in a higher-level computation graph. The goal of Lopez et al. [2022] was to learn a causal graph over low-level variables. They show that when observations come from a model that satisfies the f-DAG property, the DAG that best explains these low-level observations is likely to be unique and can be learned from data. Our goal with this paper is not to propose a new algorithm, but to prove that this causal discovery algorithm identifies a causal model over latent factors that is a causal abstraction of the low-level system. Additionally, we show that some assumptions allow us to make these latent factors identifiable up to trivial equivalence. We call this the anchor assumption . Loosely 

> arXiv:2606.19594v1 [cs.LG] 17 Jun 2026

speaking, it requires that for each latent factor, there exist low-level variables that uniquely influence and are influ-enced by this factor. These anchor variables do not need to be known, but by ensuring that the solutions to Boolean matrix factorization satisfy the anchor assumption, we guar-antee that the overall unsupervised objective only admits solutions that are simple reparameterizations of the true model over latent factors. We validate the theory empiri-cally by studying simulated settings where the target causal abstraction is known, and also study a fully unsupervised case where we qualitatively analyze abstractions learned from a DNN that solves an arithmetic task. 

# 2 RELATED WORK 

Causal abstractions formalize when a high-level SCM pre-serves the interventional behavior of a lower-level SCM through a state map and an intervention map [Rubenstein et al., 2017, Beckers and Halpern, 2019, Beckers et al., 2020]. This formalism has been used in mechanistic in-terpretability to test whether a proposed high-level causal model is implemented by a neural network [Geiger et al., 2021, 2024, 2025, Wu et al., 2023]. Our work instead studies the complementary problem of discovering such a high-level model directly from low-level measurements. This follows the older motivation of causal feature learning, which seeks macro-causes and macro-effects from high-dimensional ob-servations [Chalupka et al., 2016, 2017], but uses the mod-ern causal-abstraction formalism based on interventional consistency. Several recent papers study learning causal abstractions rather than only testing expert-proposed ones. Zennaro et al. [2023], Felekis et al. [2024], Massidda et al. [2024], D’Acunto et al. [2025] learn abstraction maps between low-and high-level causal models, but they all require data or distributional information from both levels. In contrast, we discover the high-level latent SCM from low-level observa-tions only. Zhu et al. [2024] are close to our work in their goal: they also consider unsupervised causal abstraction when the high-level variables are unknown. Their setting, however, relies on linear SCMs, shift interventions, linear state and intervention maps, and constructive abstractions, which implies that each low-level variable can only belong to one latent factor. In contrast, we identify high-level latent factors from low-level measurements through a low-rank hy-pothesis and weaker identifiability assumptions (the anchor condition). Targeted reduction of causal models [Keki´ c et al., 2024] learns a reduced high-level causal model and a map from low-level shift interventions to high-level interventions from interventional data. However, it is target-centered: the high-level model is built around a known variable of interest, rather than discovering a general latent-factor SCM. Our structural assumptions connect causal abstraction dis-covery to low-rank causal discovery and latent-variable learning. We build on factor DAGs Lopez et al. [2022], where a low-rank adjacency structure is represented by la-tent factors mediating low-level causal relations. Low-rank causal discovery has also been studied as a structural restric-tion on causal graphs [Dong and Sebag, 2022, Fang et al., 2023]. Structural Causal Bottleneck Models [Bing et al., 2026], are closely related in that they posit that causal ef-fects between high-dimensional variables can factor through low-dimensional bottlenecks, and they provide identifiabil-ity results for such bottlenecks. However, their framework treats bottlenecks primarily as task-specific sufficient sum-maries for estimating causal effects in a known graph, rather than as a learned high-level SCM equipped with explicit state and intervention maps satisfying a causal-abstraction criterion. Our anchor assumption, inspired by topic modeling [Arora et al., 2012], can be related to pure-child assumptions in causal representation learning. For example, Xie et al. [2020] identify latent causal graphs in linear non-Gaussian measurement models using pure observed children of latent variables; Markham et al. [2023] introduce neuro-causal fac-tor analysis, which learns latent common causes of observed measurements. These resemble our out-anchor condition, but our setting differs in that our observed variables also me-diate latent factors relations. In different setups, other works about the identifiability of deep generative models [Moran et al., 2022, Lee and Gu, 2026] or about the identifiability of Boolean matrix factorization [Miron et al., 2021, DeSantis et al., 2022] also resort to very similar assumptions. 

# 3 BACKGROUND NOTIONS 

In this section, we define structural causal models [Pearl, 2009] and introduce their properties before formalizing causal abstractions. 

Definition 1 (Structural causal model) . A structural causal model (SCM) is a tuple M = ( V, U, F), where: 

• V is a set of endogenous variables taking values in 

Val V := S  

> V∈V

Val V . We denote by V ⊂ V a subset of these variables. Realizations of V (respectively V)are denoted v (resp. v). 

• U is a set of exogenous variables (or context ), taking values in Val U := S  

> U∈U

Val U . We denote by U ⊂ U 

a subset of these variables. Realizations of U (respec-tively U) are denoted u (resp. u). 

• for each V ∈ V , we define a mechanism FV ∈ F :Val Pa V × Val U → Val V , where Pa V ⊆ V \ { V } is the set of endogenous parents of V .

Crucially, SCMs provide a formalism for interventions. 

Definition 2 (Intervention) . An intervention i is described by a support I ⊆ V and a family of functions {IV }V ∈I such that for each V ∈ I, IV : Val Pa V × Val U → Val V replaces the original mechanism FV . An intervention is hard if the functions IV are constant assignments, which we denote 

i ∈ Hard I. Otherwise, it is soft , which we denote i ∈ Soft I.

Following Geiger et al. [2025], Eberhardt and Scheines [2007], we generalize the notion of soft interventions: 

Definition 3 (Parametric interventions) . A parametric in-tervention i is described by a support I ⊆ V and a family of functions {IV }V ∈I such that for each V ∈ I,

IV : Soft V → Soft V replaces the original mechanism FV

with IV ⟨FV ⟩. We denote i ∈ Para I.

In words, parametric interventions 1 depend on the original mechanisms of the SCM to perform their replacement. They extend the notion of soft interventions, which are simply “constant” parametric interventions. In the following, we denote I the set of admissible interventions on M, and we denote Mi the SCM subject to the intervention i ∈ I .Given a context assignment u ∈ Val U , the SCM defines a system of equations ∀V ∈ V , V = FV

 vPa V , u whose solution (when it exists) is an endogenous assignment v ∈

Val V . We can use the graphical properties of an SCM to find its solutions [Halpern, 2000]. 

Definition 4 (Causal graph) . The causal graph of M is the directed graph G = ( V, E) defined such that 

(V1 → V2) ∈ E ⇐⇒ V1 ∈ Pa V2

The graph G can be encoded by its adjacency matrix A ∈{0, 1}n×n with Aij = 1 ⇐⇒ (Vi → Vj ) ∈ E .

Definition 5 (Solve operator) . For an intervention i ∈ I 

and a context u ∈ Val U we denote by Solve( Mi; u) ∈

Val V a solution to the system of equations defined by the SCM Mi.

Assumption 1 (Strong acyclicity) . The causal graph of M

is independent of context U2.

In the setting we study, we will always assume strong acyclicity. Thus, we evaluate the mechanisms in topological order to find the unique solution to the Solve operator. Finally, we can extend SCMs to the probabilistic case. 

Definition 6 (Probabilistic causal models) . A probabilistic causal model is a tuple (M, Pr) where M is a SCM and 

Pr is a probability distribution on contexts U.

In this setting, we consider the induced distribution on 

Solve( Mi; u), following Beckers and Halpern [2019]: 

PrMi (v) := P r({u : Solve( Mi; u) = v})    

> 1Called interventionals by Geiger et al. [2025].
> 2This notion is sometimes known as strong recursivity in the literature, e.g. in Beckers and Halpern [2019].

Causal abstractions. A causal abstraction relates a low-level SCM L = ( X , UL, FL) and a high-level SCM H =(Z, UH , FH ) (typically containing much fewer variables), such that they both describe the same causal phenomena [Rubenstein et al., 2017]. 

Definition 7 (Exact transformations) . Let (L, PrL) and 

(H, PrH ) be two probabilistic causal models. Let τ :Val X → Val Z and ω : IL → I H be two partial surjective functions where ω is order preserving. 

(H, PrH ) is an exact (τ − ω)-transformation of (L, PrL) if 

∀i ∈ I L, PrHω(i) = τ (P rLi ),

where τ (P rL) = P rL({x : τ (x) = z}) denotes the push-forward distribution of PrL by τ .

Intuitively, for a causal abstraction to faithfully capture low-level effects at the high-level, applying i at the low-level and translating outcomes via τ matches applying ω(i) directly at the high-level, which can be represented by the following commutative diagram: 

i ω(i)

PrLi PrHω(i)

> ω
> τ

We refer to τ as the state map , and ω as the intervention map .Beckers and Halpern [2019] observe that the notion of ex-act transformation can be too weak because an unfortu-nate choice of PrL, PrH may hide mechanistic mismatches. They therefore introduce uniform transformations: 

Definition 8 (Uniform transformations) . H is a uniform 

(τ − ω)-transformation of L if for all distributions PrL on the low-level context UL, there exists a distribution PrH

such that (H, PrH ) is an exact (τ − ω)-transformation of 

(L, PrL).

# 4 TOWARDS CAUSAL ABSTRACTIONS DISCOVERY 

Most current applications of causal abstractions are related to neural network interpretability: an expert proposes a can-didate high-level model H about what logic the model might implement to solve a given task, and then tests whether the computational graph L of a neural network implements it [Geiger et al., 2021, 2024, Wu et al., 2023]. Intuitively, we view H as a model of latents that summarize the computations done by the low-level computational graph 

L: the value of each latent Z ∈ Z can be computed with a subset of variables X ⊆ X , and in turn there is another subset of variables X′ ⊆ X which can essentially be deter-mined by the value of this Z. In other words, Z summarizes 

all there is to know about the causal relations X → X′.Proposing a candidate high-level model H is difficult, be-cause it requires intuition or expertise about the task at hand: for instance, we can propose a logic for two-digit addition because we master this task. In the following, we develop assumptions under which we can learn a high-level model 

H directly from low-level measurements by minimizing a differentiable objective. In particular, we recall from Lopez et al. [2022] that for an SCM M whose graph G is low-rank, one can naturally construct a latent SCM M∗. We prove that this latent SCM 

M∗ is a uniform transformation of M. Since causal dis-covery tools allow us to learn the graph and mechanisms of M from data, we propose later a practical algorithm for unsupervised causal abstraction discovery inspired by it. 

Factor directed acyclic graphs. Consider the causal graph 

G between observed variables X , encoded by an adjacency matrix A ∈ { 0, 1}n×n, where n is the number of variables. In causal discovery, where we seek to learn the causal graph 

G from observations, a common structural assumption to restrict the space of candidate graphs is the low-rankness of the adjacency matrix A [Dong and Sebag, 2022, Fang et al., 2023]. More specifically, assuming that A has Boolean rank 

m < n means that there exists Q, R ∈ { 0, 1}n×m such that 

A = Q ⋄ R⊤ := 

> m

_

> k=1

 Q∗k ∧ R∗k

,

where ⋄ denotes the Boolean matrix product, illustrated in Figure 2. Intuitively, this low-rank decomposition captures the idea that many low-level variables, like genes in a reg-ulatory network [Alizadeh et al., 2000] or neurons in the brain [Yeo et al., 2011], share the same parents and children due to higher-order functions. Matrix factorization meth-ods have previously been used to discover such higher-level functions [Newman et al., 2015]. This factorization admits a graphical interpretation via fac-tor directed graphs .

Definition 9 (Factor SCM) . An f-SCM is an SCM M =(V, U, F) such that V is partitioned into two subsets: ob-served variables X = {X1, . . . , X n} and unobserved latent 

factors Z = {Z1, . . . , Z m}. Additionally, we suppose that the causal graph G of an f-SCM is bipartite, directed, and strongly acyclic, and we denote it an f-DAG .

In particular, the edges in G may only link variables to factors or factors to variables: 

G = ( V = X ∪ Z , EV ), EV ⊂ (X × Z ) ∪ (Z × X ).

Relating back to Boolean matrix factorization, the matrix Q

captures the adjacency matrix of directed edges from low-level variables to factors, i.e., X → Z, while R captures the directed edges from factors Z back to low-level variables X.Thus, Q and R fully characterize the f-DAG. Further, the graph G can be collapsed into two distinct (“mono-partite”) graphs: one over variables GX with 

Xi → Xj ⇐⇒ ∃ Z ∈ Z , X i → Z → Xj in G,and one over factors GZ defined analogously. From now on, we will distinguish 3 different notions of parents in an f-DAG: for any Z ∈ Z , X ∈ X ,

X′ ∈ Pa Z ⇐⇒ X′ → Z in GZ′ ∈ Pa X ⇐⇒ Z′ → X in GX′ ∈ Pa LX ⇐⇒ X′ → X in GL

Z′ ∈ Pa HZ ⇐⇒ Z′ → Z in GH

Key idea. The notion of f-DAGs seems to meet our intuitive desiderata for causal abstractions discovery in that they summarize the way low-level variables interact with fewer factors, and they are learnable from data with low-rank causal discovery. The following sections formalize these two points: we show how the factor-level description can indeed be cast as a uniform transformation of the variable-level description, and we identify conditions under which the factor representation is identifiable. 

# 5 THEORETICAL RESULTS 

This section formalizes the previous insights with three results that justify the use of low-rank causal discovery to discover causal abstractions: (i) first, we show that if we knew the underlying f-SCM that generates low-level observations, we could derive a causal abstraction of the low-level model; (ii) since we do not know the underlying f-SCM, we establish assumptions under which Boolean matrix factorization can recover the latent factor variables up to simple reparameterizations; (iii) completing the story, we derive assumptions under which the full high-level SCM can be recovered up to simple reparameterizations. We state our main results, and sketch some of the proofs; the full derivations are available in Appendix B. 

5.1 F-SCMS BUILD CAUSAL ABSTRACTIONS 

Let M = ( X ∪ Z , U, F) be an f-SCM. Denote G the asso-ciated f-DAG, and denote GL (resp. GH ) its collapse on the observed variables X (resp. latent factors Z). Furthermore, suppose that there is no direct link from exogenous variables 

U to latent factors Z: intuitively, we think of factors as sum-marizing low-level measurements, and we may not want to consider that this summary stochastic. In other words, M

admits the following mechanisms: 

∀X ∈ X , F X : Val Pa X × Val U → Val X

∀Z ∈ Z , F Z : Val Pa Z → Val ZL

> H
> X1
> X2
> X3
> X4
> X5
> X6
> Z1
> Z2
> Z3

Figure 1: Illustration of H (in red), L (in green), as well as the mechanisms FX (in blue) and FZ (in orange). where Pa X ⊆ Z and Pa Z ⊆ X .These mechanisms imply the following low-level mecha-nisms over L = ( X , U, FL) and high-level mechanisms over H = ( Z, U, FH ) when collapsing on either type of node (see Figure 1 for an illustration): 

F LX : Val Pa LX × Val U → Val X

x, u 7 → FX



{FZ (xPa Z )}Z∈Pa X , u



F HZ : Val Pa HZ × Val U → Val Z

z, u 7 → FZ



{FX (zPa X , u)}X∈Pa Z



where Pa LX = S 

> Z∈Pa X

Pa Z ⊆ X and Pa HZ =S 

> X∈Pa Z

Pa X ⊆ Z . That is, we compose together how low-level variables define factors and how those factors de-fine downstream low-level variables. Note that L and H

share here the same context U, coming from the f-SCM M.

Example 1. As a concrete example, based on Figure 1, the mechanism F HZ3 for the high-level variable Z3 in the collapsed model H is a function of Z1 to Z2 such that F HZ3 =

FZ3 (FX4 (Z1), F X6 (Z2)) .

Key idea. The first result is to show that if we knew the f-SCM that generates observations of low-level variables, the corresponding collapsed SCM H over the factors alone is a valid causal abstraction of the collapsed SCM L over low-level variables alone. To derive this result, we will show that 

H is an exact transformation of L. To show this property, we will first need to define all the relevant mappings from low-level to high-level. 

Intervention sets. We consider IL to be a subset of all possible hard interventions Hard X , and IH a subset of para-metric interventions Para Z that we characterize below. 

State map. The state map τ : Val X → Val Z reconstructs factors from variables using the underlying mechanisms F:

∀x ∈ Val X , ∀Z ∈ Z , (τ (x)) Z = FZ (( x)Pa Z ).

Intervention map. The intervention map ω translates hard interventions on X to parametric ones on Z:

ω : IL ⊆ Hard X → I H ⊆ Para Z

iL 7 → iH

More specifically, iL ∈ I L is a hard intervention character-ized by its support IL ⊆ X and the replacement of some low-level mechanisms by some constant assignment: 

∀X ∈ IL, F LX (·) ← CX ∈ Val X

In the corresponding high-level system, iH ∈ I H is a para-metric intervention characterized by its support 

IH := [

> X∈IL

Ch X

and the replacement of some high-level mechanisms: ∀Z ∈

IH , F HZ ← IHZ ⟨F HZ ⟩, where for any z ∈ Val Z and u ∈

Val U ,

IHZ ⟨F HZ ⟩(zPa HZ , u) := FZ



{F ∗ 

> X

(zPa X , u)}X∈Pa Z



where F ∗ 

> X

=

(

CX X ∈ IL

FX X / ∈ IL

.

Example 2. Continuing the previous example, a hard inter-vention i ∈ I L : X4 ← C4 will modify F HZ3 by replacing it with F HZ3 = FZ3 (C4, F X6 (Z2)) .

In words, IH contains the parametric interventions that are realizable given the current underlying mechanisms F and all hard interventions IL allowed in X 3.

Theorem 1 (Uniform transformation) . With τ and ω defined as above, H is a uniform (τ − ω)-transformation of L.

The proof, available in Appendix B.1, essentially verifies the points of Definition 7 and 8 one by one. The commutativity of the diagram is proven by induction, from root to leaf nodes, and relies importantly on the fact that context is shared between H and L.

5.2 IDENTIFIABILITY OF THE F-DAG 

Factors Z are unobserved latents, hence the question of whether they are recoverable from data. Indeed, without fur-ther assumptions, one could imagine splitting a given factor 

Z into two factors without affecting any observed variable. First, we focus on the graphical structure and study the iden-tifiability of the adjacency matrix A and of its factorization 

Q ⋄ R⊤ up to simple reparameterizations. 

> 3

A careful reader will see that our definition of IL considers that low-level hard interventions only disconnect edges Z → X

from the perspective of the f-SCM M, not X → Z ones. Assumption 2. The low-level SCM L verifies causal suffi-ciency, Markov property, and faithfulness 4.

Assumption 3. Each factor Z ∈ Z has at least two parents in G.

Under Assumption 2 and 3, Lopez et al. [2022] show that the low-rank assumption on the adjacency matrix A over variables X reduces the Markov equivalence class (MEC) over the graph GL, thus making it often identifiable. 

Lemma 1 (Identifiability of GL, from Lopez et al. [2022]) .

Under Assumption 3, the MEC of GL reduces to a singleton. 

Starting from this point, we propose conditions to ensure that the full f-DAG G, including the latent factors, is identifi-able up to permutation of indices. We present identifiability results for the mechanisms in the next section. The key extra assumption we introduce involves the exis-tence of “anchors” for each latent factor. In topic modeling, anchors are words that are specific to a given topic: they only belong to one cluster, and no other [Arora et al., 2012]. Inspired by this idea, we define anchors for factors. 

Definition 10 (Anchors) . For X ∈ X and Z ∈ Z , we say that X is an in-anchor of Z if Ch X = {Z}, i.e., the only child of X is Z in G. Analogously, X is an out-anchor of Z

if Pa X = {Z}, i.e., the only parent of X is Z in G.

In matrix terms, this means that for any factor Z with index 

k, X is an in-anchor of Z if its index i is such that Qik = 1 

and ∀l̸ = k, Q il = 0 , i.e., the sum (in N) of the row i is 1 exactly. We can interpret out-anchors similarly on R.

Assumption 4. Each factor Z ∈ Z has at least one in-anchor and one out-anchor. 

In high dimensional systems, Assumption 4 is fairly reason-able: canonical marker genes are genes that may uniquely identify a given cell type [Zeisel et al., 2015], and some regions of the brain correspond to “specialized functional components” [Sporns and Betzel, 2016] where it is rea-sonable that some neurons in these specialized regions are anchors for the whole region. Similarly, when solving some task, some neurons of a large neural network may only contribute to one high-level concept, while most of them contribute to many. In particular, this assumption is softer than other causal abstraction frameworks which usually assume constructive abstractions , which implies that X can be partitioned into cells [Chalupka et al., 2016, Geiger et al., 2021], i.e., all parents of a latent Z are in-anchors, and all its children are out-anchors. 

> 4These assumptions are required for the identifiability state-ments, but not for Theorem 1.

Fix an adjacency matrix A ∈ { 0, 1}n×n with rank( A) = 

m ≤ n5. By definition of the Boolean rank, there exists a decomposition of m terms A = Q ⋄ R⊤ with Q, R ∈{0, 1}n×m.

Lemma 2 (Reading Q, R in A). Under Assumption 4, the columns of Q and the rows of R⊤ are readable in A.

Intuitively, an anchor connects to exactly one latent factor, so its row/column in A directly copies that factor’s connectivity pattern. For two vectors x, y ∈ Rn, we write x ≤ y if 

∀i ∈ [n], x i ≤ yi.

Definition 11 (Minimality) . A row Ai∗ is minimal if it is not null, and there is no other non-zero row Ah∗ such that 

Ah∗ ≤ Ai∗ and Ah∗̸ = Ai∗. Minimal columns are defined analogously. 

This notion depends only on A, and characterizes the rows for which no other row is a strict subset of them. 

Lemma 3 (Minimality-anchor correspondence) . Under As-sumption 4, in-anchors correspond to the minimal rows of 

A, and out-anchors to the minimal columns of A.

Anchors appear as the minimal rows and columns in the adjacency matrix because their pure connection patterns cannot be formed by combining the connections of other factors. 

Theorem 2 (Identifiability of (Q, R )). Under Assumption 4, a Boolean factorization A = Wmk=1 Q∗kR⊤ 

> k∗

is unique up to a simultaneous permutation of the m factors. 

Recovering the correct causal graph identifies the connec-tions drawn by the latent factors, but does not give access to their actual values. The next section exposes what additional equivalence classes f-SCMs are subject to. 

5.3 IDENTIFIABILITY OF THE MECHANISMS 

Latent factors are only observed through their downstream effect on the variables, so the mechanisms of an f-SCM are identifiable only up to some reparameterization of the factor value spaces. This section makes this statement pre-cise and gives simple conditions under which the admissible reparameterizations reduce to affine or monotone transfor-mations. 

Definition 12 (X -equivalence) . Two f-SCMs M, fM are 

X -equivalent if they induce the same low-level collapsed mechanisms on X , i.e., ∀X ∈ X , F LX = eF LX .   

> 5The Boolean rank of Ais not easy to compute if one had to do it in practice, it is NP-complete [Orlin, 1977], but is uniquely defined by only looking at A.

Lemma 4 (Reparameterization symmetry) . Let M be an f-SCM and let (ρZ )Z∈Z be any family of bijections ρZ :Val Z → Val Z . Define fM over the same f-DAG by eFZ := 

ρ−1 

> Z

◦ FZ and eFX

 zPa X , u := FX

 (ρZ (zZ )) Z∈Pa X , u.Then fM is X -equivalent to M.

Factors can be reparameterized by arbitrary bijections with-out affecting observational and interventional behavior on X .We propose assumptions to restrict this equivalence class. 

Definition 13 (Linear parent mechanisms) . An f-SCM has 

linear parent mechanisms if for every Z ∈ Z the mechanism 

FZ is affine: for all x ∈ Val X ,

FZ (xPa Z ) = bZ + X

> X∈Pa Z

aZX xX ,

where aZX , b Z ∈ R, and with at least one nonzero coeffi-cient per factor: ∀Z ∈ Z , ∃X ∈ Pa Z , a ZX ̸ = 0 .

Theorem 3 (Linear parent identifiability) . Let M, fM be two X -equivalent f-SCMs sharing the same f-DAG with out-anchors for all factors, linear parent mechanisms and real supports. Then for every Z ∈ Z there exists a unique bijection ρZ such that ˜FZ = ρ−1 

> Z

◦ FZ , and it is affine: 

ρZ : zZ 7 → αZ zZ + βZ with αZ̸ = 0 

We show in Appendix B.5 similar results when child mech-anisms are affine. These results motivate the metrics that should be used to evaluate the method in practice. In particular, using metrics invariant to linear reparameterization to match factors Z

against external hypotheses only makes sense if we are willing to assume linearity of the mechanisms. 

# 6 PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION 

We now specify the learning objective for our unsupervised causal abstraction discovery method (UCAD), and show additional connections with causal abstractions. Our practi-cal implementation draws inspiration from low-rank causal discovery, with specific additional constraints. On synthetic experiments, we show that our algorithm recovers ground-truth latent factors, up to the expected equivalence classes predicted by theory. 

6.1 LEARNING OBJECTIVE 

We extend the low-rank causal discovery objective of Lopez et al. [2022] with specific additional constraints. We parame-terize separately the conditional distributions with Θ and the causal graph with Φ. The constrained optimization problem is the following: 

max  

> Φ,Θ

S(Φ , Θ) such that 



CDAG (Φ) = 0 

Canchors (Φ) = 0 

Csparsity (Φ) ≤ tol s

Objective function. 

S(Φ , Θ) = EG′∼G(Φ) 

> i∼P

Ex∼p(i)

> data

X

> X / ∈I

log pX 

> Θ

(xX | xPa G′

> X

)

with G(Φ) the causal graph model, P is the empirical dis-tribution over intervention regimes IL, p(i) 

> data

the empirical distribution over observed variables X under intervention i,and pX 

> Θ

is a density model for the conditional distribution of X ∈ X conditioned on its parents Pa G′ 

> X

in the sampled graph G′ ∼ G(Φ) .Our graph model G(Φ) is parametrized with a Gumbel-softmax on a matrix W ∈ {− 1, 0, 1}n×m such that Qij =

1{Wij = 1 } and Rij = 1{Wij = −1}. This way, Qij and 

Rij cannot be simultaneously equal to 1, and no self-loop is introduced. Our conditional densities pX 

> Θ

, which aim to recover the mechanisms F LX , are parameterized such that for each factor 

Z indexed by k ∈ [m] in Q and each variable X indexed by 

j ∈ [n] in R, we have: 

zZ = F Θ 

> Z

(Q:kx); xX ∼ Normal (F Θ 

> X

(Rj:z), σ 2 

> j

)

where σ2 

> j

> 0, and F Θ 

> Z

, F Θ 

> X

are linear models or MLP in practice. In other words, we assume additive Gaussian noise on variables, while we do not introduce noise on factors. 

Acyclicity constraint. CDAG enforces that the final graph is indeed a DAG. Several formulations have been proposed in the literature, which we describe in Appendix C. Addi-tionally, we propose a constraint formulation for the case where variables X ∈ X are “layered”, as in a neural net-work where a neuron X1 cannot causally influence another neuron X2 if both are in the same layer or if X2 precedes X1

in the computational graph. In other words, we restrict the search space to block upper-triangular adjacency matrices. For a low-rank matrix A = Q ⋄ R⊤, this translates into the per-factor condition: 

∀k ∈ [m], max   

> i:Qik =1

ℓ(i) < min   

> j:Rjk =1

ℓ(j),

i.e., every parent selected by column Q:k lies in a strictly earlier layer than every child selected by column R:k. This translates into a differentiable constraint that can be effi-ciently computed in O(nm + mL ) time, with L the number of layers, applied on G(Φ) :

CDAG (Φ) := X

> k
> lp ≥lc

 X

> i:ℓ(i)= lp

Q(Φ) ik 

 X

> j:ℓ(j)= lc

R(Φ) jk 

Anchor constraint. As discussed previously, the Boolean factorization of the adjacency matrix is not unique unless additional assumptions are made, e.g. Assumption 4. For our model to find such solutions, we consider Canchor , applied to 

G(Φ) .A factor Z indexed by k ∈ [m] has an in-anchor if and only if there exists a row i ∈ [n] such that Qik = 1 and 

∀ ℓ̸ = k : Qiℓ = 0 . Equivalently, 

∀k ∈ [m], max  

> i

Qik 

^

> ℓ̸=k

(1 − Qiℓ ) = 1 

We have a similar formulation for out-anchors. This for-mulation is made differentiable using classic optimization tricks, to finally obtain Canchor , as described in Appendix C. 

Sparsity constraint As in many causal discovery algo-rithms, we impose some sparsity constraint on the learned graph, in the form of an L1 constraint 

Csparsity (Φ) := 

P 

> ij

|Q(Φ) ij | + |R(Φ) ij |

mn 

One can adjust the tolerance level tol s depending on prior knowledge of the structure to be learned. 

6.2 LINK WITH CAUSAL ABSTRACTIONS 

Exact transformation is a binary notion, while it is intuitive to have a gradient in how close L and H are. Following Beckers et al. [2020], we introduce a soft notion that cap-tures this intuition: 

Definition 14 (Approximate transformation) . Let (L, Pr)

and (H, Pr) be two probabilistic causal models sharing their context U. Let τ : Val X → Val Z and ω : IL → I H be two partial surjective functions where ω is order preserving. Let dH a distance on Z, P a probability distribution over 

IL, and η ≥ 0 a scalar. H is a η-(τ − ω)-approximate transformation of L if 

E i∼P

> u∼Pr

h

dH



τ  Solve( Li; u), Solve  Hω(i); ui 

≤ η

Note that other choices of statistics than E can be made depending on the use-case, and that we specialized the def-inition to match our case where U is shared by L and H.Taking η = 0 recovers the definition of exact transforma-tion. In practice, ˆτ , ˆω, and HΦ,Θ are learned, and we wish that 

ˆ∆ := E i∼P

> u∼Pr

h

dH



ˆτ  Solve( Li; u), Solve  Hˆω(i)Φ,Θ ; ui 

diminishes as the model is trained. 

Theorem 4 (Approximate transformation bound) . If all mechanisms F Θ 

> Z

, F Θ 

> X

are Lipschitz, then ˆ∆ is linearly bounded by S(Φ , Θ) .

In words, under regularity conditions on the learned mecha-nisms, the learned high-level model HΦ,Θ is an η-(ˆ τ − ˆω)-approximate transformation of the ground-truth low-level model L, and η diminishes as a linear function of the learn-ing objective diminishes. 

6.3 PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION 

We implement 6 this constrained optimization problem using PyTorch [Ansel et al., 2024] and Cooper [Gallego-Posada et al., 2025]. 

6.4 EMPIRICAL RESULTS Synthetic. We validate UCAD on synthetic f-SCMs with se-tups ranging from linear noiseless mechanisms with layered structure to nonlinear mechanisms with Gaussian noise on variables X on non-layered DAGs. In all settings, ground-truth f-DAGs are generated with enforced anchors and mod-els are trained on a mix of observational and interventional regimes. See Appendix D for details. For each setup, we generate 5 DAGs, on which we train 

60 UCAD models with varying hyperparameters and seed. For each DAG, we select the configuration with lowest validation negative log-likelihood (NLL) among those that reached constraint feasibility. Since we aim to assess the recovery of latent factors, we pay particular attention to the mean correlation coefficient (MCC), which finds the alignment with highest absolute Pearson correlation between the learned and ground-truth factors. When dealing with arbitrary non-linear transfor-mations, we consider MCC-RDC, which is based on the randomized dependence coefficient [Lopez-Paz et al., 2013]. Both metrics are invariant to permutation of the latents. In the case where we expect the f-SCM to be recoverable up to linear reparametrization (i.e., when FX and/or FZ

are affine), a perfect MCC-Pearson of 1 is theoretically attainable. The performance of our model is fairly invariant to the number of variables ( 16 , 64 or 128 ) and factors ( 3, 6

or 8), to whether the DAG has a layered structure or not, and to whether additive Gaussian noise is added on the variables. When averaging over all these cases (13 experiments) we measure an average MCC (Pearson) of 0.83 . Importantly, the variability we observe between cases does not seem to depend on whether both FX , F Z are linear or only one. We report MCC for a set of experiments in Table 1. In ad-dition, we report MCC after applying random orthogonal transformations to both ground-truth factors and learned factors, to contextualize the results. MCC is equal to 1

when the latent factors are perfectly recovered, up to linear reparametrization and permutation of indices, and decreases  

> 6See https://github.com/theosaulus/ucad .

Table 1: Test MCC (Pearson) assessing reconstruction of ground-truth latent factors when FX , ˆFX are linear and 

FZ , ˆFZ are non-linear (mean ± std over 5 DAGs, of the UCAD model achieving the lowest validation feasible ob-jective). See Table 4 for more details. Noisy Layered n-m Learned Ground-truth rotated Learned rotated                                                             

> ×✓16-3 0.80 ±0.16 0.70 ±0.03 0.65 ±0.11
> 64-6 0.93 ±0.08 0.69 ±0.03 0.64 ±0.04
> ××16-3 0.73 ±0.13 0.68 ±0.09 0.62 ±0.09
> 64-6 0.82 ±0.03 0.64 ±0.05 0.58 ±0.04
> ✓×16-3 0.82 ±0.15 0.68 ±0.05 0.61 ±0.10
> 64-6 0.78 ±0.11 0.67 ±0.03 0.59 ±0.06

when the factors are mixed. This comparison shows that our method recovers latents that are not only related to the ground-truth factors, but are also aligned with their coordi-nates. In the case where both FX , F Z are non-linear, theory pre-dicts that can only recover the factors up to an arbitrary bijective transformation, which results in a drop of MCC-Pearson ( 0.63 ). The MCC-RDC score remains high, at 0.79 

in the 64 variables case, and 0.70 in the 16 variables case. These experiments tend to indicate that when assumptions are satisfied, it is possible to train a model that is capable to recover the ground truth factors, following theory. We still note a significant variability between each example, both in terms of performance and in which hyperparameters end up reaching the lowest validation NLL; algorithmic improve-ments and better search may help future developments. 

Neural network interpretability. To test UCAD on a real DNN, we consider the problem of divisibility by 6. Solving this problem is intuitively performed by checking divisibility by 2 (by looking at the last digit) and by 3 (by checking whether the sum of all digits is divisible by 3, recursively). Let the input be n ∈ { 0, . . . , N } represented in base 10 

as (d0, . . . , d K−1) ∈ { 0, . . . , 9}K , and let the output be 

y = 1[6 | n] ∈ { 0, 1}. We consider the concepts: 

c2 = 1[2 | n], c3 = 1[3 | n], c6 = c2 ∧ c3.

To match the intuitive process of computing c3, we also consider an alternative concept ˜c3 = P 

> k

dk. This problem possesses natural “negative controls” that are irrelevant: divisibility by an unrelated prime (e.g. 5, 7, 11 ). We train five MLPs with 3 hidden layers of size 32 to solve this task for digits between 0 and 1 million, until conver-gence. Then, we gather the 96 activations for unseen num-bers and train our UCAD model with 3 factors and report reconstruction metrics in Table 2. We measure a stronger reconstruction of hypothesized con-cepts than with negative controls (average MCC-RDC of 

0.72 vs. 0.07 over 5 experiments). In particular, one of the Table 2: Test metrics assessing reconstruction of positive and negative concepts by learned factors for the divisibility-by-6 task (mean ± std over 5 trained MLPs, of the UCAD model achieving lowest validation feasible objective). See Table 14 for more details. Metric 96 neurons, 3 factors NLL −0.30 ± 0.30                     

> DAG Violation 1.84 ·10 −6±3.98 ·10 −6
> Positive concepts Negative controls MCC (Pearson) 0.41 ±0.09 0.03 ±0.01
> MCC (RDC) 0.72 ±0.05 0.07 ±0.01

factors has an average Pearson correlation of 0.80 with c2,which is a strong signal that it is consistently implemented by the network. Reasonably high MCC-RDC coefficients can be observed for c6 and c3 (0.55 and 0.32 ), especially compared to negative controls which are not reconstructed as well (at most 0.14 ). These results remain difficult to in-terpret, because a low agreement with some concept could sometimes be an indication that the DNN implements a dif-ferent strategy to solve the problem, for example a heuristic that works only up to 1 million. 

# 7 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this paper, we demonstrated that it is possible to discover causal abstractions directly from low-level measurements without relying on an expert to propose a candidate high-level model. By leveraging factor directed acyclic graphs and introducing the anchor assumption, we proved that low-rank causal discovery methods can identify high-level latent factors up to simple reparameterization. We translated these theoretical guarantees into a practical learning objective and empirically tested it on both synthetic datasets and a small neural network. While our theoretical results provide a foundation for UCAD, they rely on knowing the true number of latent factors. A direction for future work is understanding the behavior of the learning objective when this number is mis-specified. Scaling our approach to larger and more complex systems is another direction. Our current experiments on the divisi-bility task highlight the difficulty of interpreting the heuris-tics learned by deep neural networks. Applying it to larger models in language, vision, or to noisy scientific data, will require finding scalable optimization procedures. In particular, the hope of a causal abstraction in mecha-nistic interpretability lies in its ability to reliably control a system’s output. Future research should focus on steering ex-periments, to test whether intervening on the unsupervised discovered high-level factors can reliably alter the behavior of DNNs on complex tasks. Acknowledgements 

Théo Saulus thanks Damien Ferbach for discussions on the algebraic structure over high-level interventions, Juan Ramirez for advices in implementing the constrained opti-mization problem, and Julien Boussard for general proof-reading and comments. This research was partially supported by the NSERC Discov-ery Grant RGPIN-2023-04869 and by the Canada CIFAR AI Chair Program. Simon Lacoste-Julien is a CIFAR Associate Fellow in the Learning in Machines & Brains program. This research was enabled in part by compute resources provided by Mila ( mila.quebec ). 

References 

Ash A Alizadeh, Michael B Eisen, R Eric Davis, Chi Ma, Izidore S Lossos, Andreas Rosenwald, Jennifer C Boldrick, Hajeer Sabet, Truc Tran, Xin Yu, et al. Distinct types of diffuse large b-cell lymphoma identified by gene expression profiling. Nature , 403(6769):503–511, 2000. Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh Jain, Michael Voznesensky, Bin Bao, Peter Bell, David Berard, Evgeni Burovski, et al. Pytorch 2: Faster machine learning through dynamic python bytecode trans-formation and graph compilation. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM international conference on architectural sup-port for programming languages and operating systems, volume 2 , pages 929–947, 2024. Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, and Ankur Moitra. Learning topic models–going beyond svd. In 2012 IEEE 53rd annual symposium on foundations of computer science , pages 1–10. IEEE, 2012. Sander Beckers and Joseph Y Halpern. Abstracting causal models. In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artifi-cial intelligence , volume 33, pages 2678–2685, 2019. Sander Beckers, Frederick Eberhardt, and Joseph Y Halpern. Approximate causal abstractions. In Uncertainty in artifi-cial intelligence , pages 606–615. PMLR, 2020. Simon Bing, Jonas Wahl, and Jakob Runge. Struc-tural causal bottleneck models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.08682 , 2026. Krzysztof Chalupka, Frederick Eberhardt, and Pietro Perona. Multi-level cause-effect systems. In Artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 361–369. PMLR, 2016. Krzysztof Chalupka, Frederick Eberhardt, and Pietro Perona. Causal feature learning: An overview. Behaviormetrika ,44(1):137–164, January 2017. ISSN 0385-7417, 1349-6964. doi: 10.1007/s41237-016-0008-2. Gabriele D’Acunto, Fabio Massimo Zennaro, Yorgos Felekis, Paolo Di Lorenzo, et al. Causal abstraction learn-ing based on the semantic embedding principle. In Pro-ceedings of the 42st International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Tristan Deleu, Mizu Nishikawa-Toomey, Jithendaraa Sub-ramanian, Nikolay Malkin, Laurent Charlin, and Yoshua Bengio. Joint bayesian inference of graphical structure and parameters with a single generative flow network. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 36: 31204–31231, 2023. Derek DeSantis, Erik Skau, Duc P Truong, and Boian Alexandrov. Factorization of binary matrices: Rank rela-tions, uniqueness and model selection of boolean decom-position. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) , 16(6):1–24, 2022. Shuyu Dong and Michèle Sebag. From graphs to dags: a low-complexity model and a scalable algorithm. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowl-edge Discovery in Databases , pages 107–122. Springer, 2022. Cian Eastwood and Christopher KI Williams. A framework for the quantitative evaluation of disentangled representa-tions. In International conference on learning represen-tations , 2018. Frederick Eberhardt and Richard Scheines. Interventions and causal inference. Philosophy of Science , 74(5):981– 995, 2007. ISSN 00318248, 1539767X. URL http: //www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/525638 .Zhuangyan Fang, Shengyu Zhu, Jiji Zhang, Yue Liu, Zhi-tang Chen, and Yangbo He. On low-rank directed acyclic graphs and causal structure learning. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 35(4):4924– 4937, 2023. Yorgos Felekis, Fabio Massimo Zennaro, Nicola Branchini, and Theodoros Damoulas. Causal optimal transport of abstractions. In Causal Learning and Reasoning , pages 462–498. PMLR, 2024. Jose Gallego-Posada, Juan Ramirez, Meraj Hashemizadeh, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Cooper: A Library for Con-strained Optimization in Deep Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.01212 , 2025. Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts. Causal abstractions of neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:9574–9586, 2021. Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah Goodman. Finding alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural rep-resentations. In Causal Learning and Reasoning , pages 160–187. PMLR, 2024. Atticus Geiger, Duligur Ibeling, Amir Zur, Maheep Chaud-hary, Sonakshi Chauhan, Jing Huang, Aryaman Arora, Zhengxuan Wu, Noah Goodman, Christopher Potts, et al. Causal abstraction: A theoretical foundation for mech-anistic interpretability. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26(83):1–64, 2025. Joseph Y Halpern. Axiomatizing causal reasoning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 12:317–337, 2000. Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical repa-rameterization with gumbel-softmax. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. Armin Keki´ c, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Michel Besserve. Targeted reduction of causal models. In The 40th Confer-ence on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , 2024. Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 ,2014. Hao-Chih Lee, Matteo Danieletto, Riccardo Miotto, Sarah T Cherng, and Joel T Dudley. Scaling structural learning with no-bears to infer causal transcriptome networks. In 

Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2020 , pages 391– 402. World Scientific, 2019. Seunghyun Lee and Yuqi Gu. Deep discrete encoders: Iden-tifiable deep generative models for rich data with discrete latent layers. Journal of the American Statistical Associa-tion , 121(553):194–208, 2026. Romain Lopez, Jan-Christian Hütter, Jonathan Pritchard, and Aviv Regev. Large-scale differentiable causal dis-covery of factor graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:19290–19303, 2022. David Lopez-Paz, Philipp Hennig, and Bernhard Schölkopf. The randomized dependence coefficient. Advances in neural information processing systems , 26, 2013. C Maddison, A Mnih, and Y Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous relaxation of discrete random variables. In 

Proceedings of the international conference on learning Representations . International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. Alex Markham, Mingyu Liu, Bryon Aragam, and Liam Solus. Neuro-causal factor analysis. In ICML 2023 Work-shop on Structured Probabilistic Inference & Generative Modeling , 2023. Riccardo Massidda, Sara Magliacane, Davide Bacciu, et al. Learning causal abstractions of linear structural causal models. In The 40th Conference on Uncertainty in Artifi-cial Intelligence , 2024. Sebastian Miron, Mamadou Diop, Anthony Larue, Eddy Robin, and David Brie. Boolean decomposition of binary matrices using a post-nonlinear mixture approach. Signal Processing , 178:107809, 2021. G Moran, D Sridhar, Y Wang, and D Blei. Identifiable deep generative models via sparse decoding. Transactions on machine learning research , 2022. Achille Nazaret, Justin Hong, Elham Azizi, and David Blei. Stable differentiable causal discovery. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 37413–37445. PMLR, 2024. Aaron M Newman, Chih Long Liu, Michael R Green, An-drew J Gentles, Weiguo Feng, Yue Xu, Chuong D Hoang, Maximilian Diehn, and Ash A Alizadeh. Robust enu-meration of cell subsets from tissue expression profiles. 

Nature methods , 12(5):453–457, 2015. James Orlin. Contentment in graph theory: covering graphs with cliques. In Indagationes Mathematicae (Proceed-ings) , volume 80, pages 406–424. Elsevier, 1977. Judea Pearl. Causality . Cambridge university press, 2009. Paul K Rubenstein, Sebastian Weichwald, Stephan Bongers, Joris M Mooij, Dominik Janzing, Moritz Grosse-Wentrup, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal consistency of structural equation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00819 , 2017. Olaf Sporns and Richard F Betzel. Modular brain networks. 

Annual review of psychology , 67(1):613–640, 2016. Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Thomas Icard, Christopher Potts, and Noah Goodman. Interpretability at scale: Iden-tifying causal mechanisms in alpaca. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:78205–78226, 2023. Feng Xie, Ruichu Cai, Biwei Huang, Clark Glymour, Zhifeng Hao, and Kun Zhang. Generalized indepen-dent noise condition for estimating latent variable causal graphs. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 33:14891–14902, 2020. BT Thomas Yeo, Fenna M Krienen, Jorge Sepulcre, Mert R Sabuncu, Danial Lashkari, Marisa Hollinshead, Joshua L Roffman, Jordan W Smoller, Lilla Zöllei, Jonathan R Poli-meni, et al. The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal of neurophysiology , 2011. Amit Zeisel, Ana B Muñoz-Manchado, Simone Codeluppi, Peter Lönnerberg, Gioele La Manno, Anna Juréus, Sueli Marques, Hermany Munguba, Liqun He, Christer Bet-sholtz, et al. Cell types in the mouse cortex and hip-pocampus revealed by single-cell rna-seq. Science , 347 (6226):1138–1142, 2015. Fabio Massimo Zennaro, Máté Drávucz, Geanina Apachitei, W Dhammika Widanage, and Theodoros Damoulas. Jointly learning consistent causal abstractions over multi-ple interventional distributions. In Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning , pages 88–121. PMLR, 2023. Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep K Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. Dags with no tears: Continuous optimization for structure learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. Yuchen Zhu, Sergio Hernan Garrido Mejia, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Michel Besserve. Unsupervised causal abstraction. In NeurIPS 2024 Causal Representation Learning Workshop , 2024. APPENDIX CONTENTS 

1 Introduction 12 Related work 23 Background notions 24 Towards causal abstractions discovery 35 Theoretical results 4

5.1 f-SCMs build causal abstractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45.2 Identifiability of the f-DAG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55.3 Identifiability of the mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

6 Practical implementation 7

6.1 Learning objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76.2 Link with causal abstractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86.3 Practical implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86.4 Empirical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

7 Discussion and future work 9A Additional figure 14 B Proofs of the theoretical results 14 

B.1 Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 B.2 Discussion on the ordering of interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 B.3 Proof of Theorem 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 B.4 Towards a more flexible identifiability result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 B.5 Proof of Theorem 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 B.6 Proof of Theorem 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 

C Practical implementation details 24 

C.1 Acyclicity constraint formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 C.2 Causal graph sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 C.3 Anchor constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 

D Experiments 26 

D.1 Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 D.2 Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 D.3 Synthetic experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 D.4 Interpretability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 

E Additional acknowledgment 33 A ADDITIONAL FIGURE 

We illustrate Boolean matrix factorization: 

Aij = 1 ⇐⇒ ∃k ∈ [m], Q ik = 1 and R⊤ 

> kj

= 1 ⇐⇒ ∃k ∈ [m], X i → Zk → Xj

Q

R⊤

Aij Xi

Zk

Xj

Figure 2: Illustration of Boolean matrix factorization. 

# B PROOFS OF THE THEORETICAL RESULTS 

B.1 PROOF OF THEOREM 1 

We will first prove two lemmas related to the algebraic structure of IL and IH , before we prove the theorem. We have previously described that low level hard interventions a ∈ I L are characterized by • their support IL

• for each X ∈ IL a constant assignment CX by which FX is replaced. At the high level, recall how we define the collapsed mechanisms for each Z ∈ Z :

F HZ : Val Pa HZ × Val U → Val Z

z, u 7 → FZ



{FX (zPa X , u)}X∈Pa Z



We characterize interventions α ∈ I H by • their support IH

• for each Z ∈ IH a “mechanistic support” KZ ⊆ Pa Z which describes what mechanisms {FX }X∈Pa Z are replaced inside of each F HZ

• for each Z ∈ IH and X ∈ KZ a constant assignment CX by which FX is replaced. We therefore define the following partial order relation over IH :

Lemma 5 (Partial order on IH ). For α, β ∈ I H , let ⪯H be the relation defined as: 

α ⪯H β ⇐⇒ 



IαH ⊆ IβH

∀Z ∈ IαH , KαZ ⊆ KβZ

∀Z ∈ IαH , ∀X ∈ KαZ , C αX = CβX

⪯H is a partial order. Proof. Reflexivity is immediate. For transitivity, consider α, β, γ ∈ I H such that α ⪯H β and β ⪯H γ. We have: • IαH ⊆ IβH ⊆ IγH

• for any Z ∈ IαH , we have KαZ ⊆ KβZ , and for any Z′ ∈ IβH , we have KβZ′ ⊆ KγZ′ . So in particular, 

∀Z ∈ IαH , KαZ ⊆ KγZ

• for any Z ∈ IαH and X ∈ KαZ , we have CαX = CβX , and for any Z′ ∈ IβH and X′ ∈ KβZ′ , we have CβX′ = CγX′ . So in particular, 

∀Z ∈ IαH , ∀X ∈ KαZ , C αX = CγX

For antisymmetry, consider α, β ∈ I H such that α ⪯H β and β ⪯H α. We have: • IαH ⊆ IβH ⊆ IαH so IβH = IαH

• for any Z ∈ IαH , we have KαZ ⊆ KβZ , and for any Z′ ∈ IβH , we have KβZ′ ⊆ KαZ′ . So in particular, 

∀Z ∈ IαH , KαZ = KβZ

• for any Z ∈ IαH and X ∈ KαZ , we have CαX = CβX , and for any Z′ ∈ IβH and X′ ∈ KβZ′ , we have CβX′ = CαX′ . So in particular, 

∀Z ∈ IαH , ∀X ∈ KαZ , C αX = CβX

Finally, α, β describe the exact same high-level intervention. This concludes the proof. 

Lemma 6. IL and IH can be equipped with partial orders ⪯L and ⪯H , and ω is order preserving with respect to them. Proof. Let’s address each point. 

Defining ⪯L We choose what is often referred to as the “natural” partial order [Beckers and Halpern, 2019]: for a, b ∈ I L,

a ⪯L b ⇐⇒ 

(

IaL ⊆ IbL

∀X ∈ IaL, C aX = CbX

Defining ⪯H We choose ⪯H as introduced in Lemma 5. 

ω is order preserving Let a, b ∈ I L such that a ⪯L b. In other words, we have: IaL ⊆ IbL and ∀X ∈ IaL, C aX = CbX

For all Z ∈ Iω(a) 

> H

= S

> X∈IaL

Ch X , the intervention ω(a) sets the internal mechanisms FX to a CX for all X ∈ IaL ∩ Pa Z .Since IaL ⊆ IbL, we obtain: 

Iω(a) 

> H

= [

> X∈IaL

⊆ [

> X∈IbL

= Iω(b)

> H

Additionally, we get: 

∀Z ∈ Iω(a) 

> H

, IaL ∩ Pa Z ⊆ IbL ∩ Pa Z

Then, since we have ∀X ∈ IaL, C aX = CbX , we get: 

∀Z ∈ Iω(a) 

> H

, ∀X ∈ IaL ∩ Pa Z , CaX = CbXPutting things together: 



Iω(a) 

> H

⊆ Iω(b)

> H

∀Z ∈ Iω(a) 

> H

, IaL ∩ Pa Z ⊆ IbL ∩ Pa Z

∀Z ∈ Iω(a) 

> H

, ∀X ∈ IaL ∩ Pa Z , CaX = CbX

That is to say, ω(a) ⪯H ω(b).

Theorem 1 (Uniform transformation) . With τ and ω defined above, H is a uniform (τ − ω)-transformation of L.Proof. We verify one by one the points of Definition 7. 

Basic properties IL and IH are sets of interventions, and (IL, ⪯L) and (IH , ⪯H ) define partially ordered sets, by Lemma 6. 

GL and GH are acyclic, so Li and Hω(i) have unique solutions under the Solve operator for a given context u ∈ Val U .

τ is surjective if we restrict its codomain to its image on the solution of L under IL.

ω is surjective: by construction, IH contains exactly the high-level parametric interventions induced by the allowed low-level hard interventions in L.

ω is order preserving by Lemma 6. 

Commutativity of the diagram at fixed context To prove the commutativity of the diagram, we will first show that commutativity holds for a fixed context u ∈ Val U , before considering a probability distribution on it. Let i ∈ I L with support 

IL ⊆ X and let u ∈ Val U . Let x = Solve( Li; u) ∈ Val X . Let’s prove by induction that τ (x) equals z = Solve( Hω(i); u).• Base case. Let’s fix Z a source node in GH . This means that Pa HZ = ∅ and that ∀X ∈ Pa Z , Pa X = ∅. On the one hand, we have: 

(z)Z = IHZ (∅, u) = FZ



{F ∗ 

> X

(∅, u)}X∈Pa Z



, where F ∗ 

> X

=

(

CX X ∈ IL

FX X / ∈ IL

On the other hand, by definition, 

(τ (x)) Z = FZ



(x)Pa Z



= FZ



{F ∗ 

> X

(∅, u)}X∈Pa Z



Hence (τ (x)) Z = ( z)Z .• Inductive step. Let Z ∈ Z . Suppose that for every ancestor Z′ of Z in GH , we have (τ (x)) Z′ = ( z)Z′ . Let’s prove 

(τ (x)) Z = ( z)Z . On the one hand, we have: 

τ (x)Z = FZ (xPa Z ) Definition of τ

= FZ



{F ∗ 

> X

(FZ′ (xPa Z′ )Z′∈Pa X , u)}X∈Pa Z



x = Solve( Li; u)= FZ



{F ∗ 

> X

(τ (x)Pa X , u)}X∈Pa Z



Definition of τ

= FZ



{F ∗ 

> X

(zPa X , u)}X∈Pa Z



Induction hypothesis On the other hand, we have: 

zZ = IHZ (zP a Z , u) z = Solve( Hω(i); u)= FZ



{F ∗ 

> X

(zPa X , u)}X∈Pa Z



Definition of ω

Thus, τ (x)Z = zZ , which concludes the induction. Probabilistic commutativity of the diagram Now, keep i ∈ I L and let u ∼ Pr. For any z ∈ Val Z , we have: 

PrHω(i) (z) = P r



{u : Solve( Hω(i); u) = z}



Definition of PrHω(i)

= P r  {u : τ (Solve( Li; u)) = z} Result above 

= P r  {u, x : Solve( Li; u) = x and τ (x) = z}

= P rLi ({x : τ (x) = z}) Definition of PrLi

= τ (P rLi )( z) Pushforward In other words, H is an exact (τ − ω)transformation of L in the sense of Definition 7. For uniformity, given that context U is shared for L and H, for any distribution PrL on the low-level context U, we simply choose PrH = P rL at the high level. The previous argument gives exactness for this pair, hence H is a uniform 

(τ − ω)-transformation of L.

B.2 DISCUSSION ON THE ORDERING OF INTERVENTIONS 

When we apply two interventions i1, i 2 on M, it might occur that some variables are affected by both i1 and i2. To determine which assignment prevails, Geiger et al. [2025] introduce the notion of intervention algebras, to fix the order in which the interventions are applied: 

Definition 15 (Intervention algebras) . Let I be a set of interventions allowed on V. We equip it with an associative composition operator ◦ : I × I → I and an identity element id . The pair (I, ◦), together with id , forms an intervention algebra if the following properties are verified: 

• the identity element id is defined such that Mid = M, i.e., no intervention performed. 

• the composition operator ◦ is such that ∀i1, i 2 ∈ I , M i1◦i2 = ( M i1 ) i2 , and ◦ is commutative if i1 and i2 target different variables, and left-annihilative if they target the same: 

(i1 ◦ i2)V =



(i2)V if V ∈ I2

(i1)V if V ∈ I1 \ I2

(id) V if V /∈ I1 ∪ I2

An induced partial order ⪯ is defined by ◦ such that ∀i1, i 2 ∈ I , i 1 ⪯ i2 ⇐⇒ i2 ◦ i1 = i2, i.e., the model Mi2◦i1 remains identical to Mi2 if and only if i1 agrees with the replacements performed by i2.

As shown by Geiger et al. [2025], hard and soft interventions both can always be equipped with an intervention algebra. This is not the case of parametric interventions, which require more care. Although the family of parametric intervention we consider might be relatable to intervention algebras, we stay closer to prior notions of exact transformation [Beckers and Halpern, 2019, Rubenstein et al., 2017] which only require the existence of partial orderings on IL, IH with respect to which ω is order preserving. 

B.3 PROOF OF THEOREM 2 Lemma 1 (Identifiability of GL, adapted from Lopez et al. [2022], Appendix B.2) . If every factor Z ∈ Z has at least two parents in G, then the MEC of GL reduces to a singleton. Proof. Let ( Xi, X j ) be an unoriented edge in the essential graph of GL. By definition of f-DAGs, there exists a factor 

Z ∈ Z such that (Xi, Z ) and (Z, X j ) are part of G. Because the edge is unoriented, it cannot be part of a v-structure in GL.In the case that every factor Z ∈ Z has at least two parents, there can be no unoriented edges, and therefore the graph is identifiable. Recall Definition 10 and Assumption 4. Fix an adjacency matrix A ∈ { 0, 1}n×n with rank( A) = m ≤ nLemma 7 (Rank of the decomposition) . For all Q, R ∈ { 0, 1}n×m verifying Assumption 4, we have rank( Q ⋄ R⊤) = m.Proof. Let’s denote for this proof eA := Q ⋄ R⊤ = Wmk=1 Q∗k ∧ R⊤

> k∗

. For each k ∈ [m], we assume the existence of at least an in-anchor ik and an out-anchor jk. This implies that eAik jk = 1 , and eAik jℓ = 0 for k̸ = ℓ, because Qik l = 0 for l̸ = k

and Rlj ℓ = 0 for l̸ = ℓ by the anchor conditions. 

A is defined here as a Boolean factorization with m terms, hence rank( eA) ≤ m.Consider any rank-1 term qr ⊤ used in a factorization of eA. For the sake of contradiction, assume that it covers both entries 

(ik, j k) and (iℓ, j ℓ) for k̸ = ℓ, i.e., qik = qiℓ = 1 and rjk = rjℓ = 1 . This implies that qik r⊤ 

> jℓ

= 1 , i.e., it also covers (ik, j ℓ),contradicting eAik jℓ = 0 . In other words, no single rank-1 term can cover two distinct in/out anchor pair. Thus, at least m

rank-1 terms are required, each of them being the only one to cover one specific coordinate, so rank( eA) ≥ m.Finally, rank( eA) = m.

Lemma 8. Not all A of rank m can be represented by Q ⋄ R⊤ verifying Assumption 4. Proof. Counter example: 

A = 13×3 − I3 =

0 1 11 0 11 1 0



cannot be represented by Q, R with anchors. Here the rank is m = n, but it still illustrates the issue, just add null blocks with this matrix on the top right to get an example with m < n .Given this counter-example, we will assume in the following that A is generated by a decomposition Q ⋄ R⊤ that respects Assumption 4. 

Lemma 2 (Reading Q, R in A). Under Assumption 4, the columns of Q and the rows of R⊤ are readable in A.Proof. We assume that for every factor with index k ∈ [m] there exists (at least) an in-anchor with index i ∈ [n]. Then one can read the value of each row of R⊤ on a row of A:

∀j ∈ [n], Aij = _

> l

Qil ∧ Rlj = Qik ∧ Rkj = Rkj 

If there exist several in-anchors for a given factor, then this equality is true for all of them. We get the same result for out-anchor and reading the columns of Q on columns of A.Assuming both in- and out-anchoring for all factors, we can read both Q and R in A.Now, let’s establish that (Q, R ) are unique up to trivial permutations of factors. For two vectors x, y ∈ Rn, we write x ≤ y

if ∀i ∈ [n], x i ≤ yi. Recall Definition 11 

Lemma 3 (Minimality-anchor correspondence) . Under Assumption 4, in-anchors correspond to the minimal rows of A, and out-anchors correspond to the minimal columns of A.Proof. ( = ⇒ ) By contraposition, let’s prove that if i is not an in-anchor, then Ai∗ is not a minimal row. Let Gi := {ℓ : Qiℓ = 1 }. For i ∈ [n] not an in-anchor, we have |Gi| ≥ 2 by definition of an in-anchor. Let k, l ∈ Gi, k ̸ = l.Let jl an out-anchor of l, and ik and in-anchor of k.We have Ai∗ = W 

> r∈Gi

Rr∗, so in particular Aik ∗ = Rk∗ ≤ Ai∗. At coordinate jl we have Rlj l = 1 and Rrj l = 0 for all 

r̸ = l (out-anchor of l), hence Aij l = W 

> r∈Gi

Rrj l = Rlj l = 1 while Aik jl = Rkj l = 0 . Therefore Aik ∗ < A i∗, so Ai∗ is not minimal. 

( ⇐= ) Let’s prove that if i is an in-anchor, then Ai∗ is a minimal row. Let ik be an in-anchor of k ∈ [m]. Suppose that ∃h ∈ [n], A h∗ ≤ Aik ∗ = Rk∗. We have, in general, Ah∗ = W 

> r

Qhr ∧ Rr∗.If ∃r̸ = k such that Qhr = 1 then Rrj r = 1 ≥ Rkj r = 0 , which contradicts Ah∗ ≤ Rk∗.Thus, Ah∗ = Qhk ∧Rk∗. If Qhk = 0 , then Ah∗ = (0 , . . . , 0) and then Aik ∗ is minimal. If Qhk = 1 , then Ah∗ = Rk∗ = Aik ∗

and Aik ∗ is minimal. For the out-anchors, apply the same reasoning to A⊤.

Theorem 2 (Identifiability of (Q, R )). Under Assumption 4, any Boolean factorization A = Wmk=1 Q∗kR⊤ 

> k∗

is unique up to a simultaneous permutation of the m factors. Proof. By Lemma 3, in-anchors correspond exactly to minimal rows, and each such minimal row equals one row of R.Now take any other factorization A = Wmr=1 eQ∗r ∧ eRr∗ that satisfies Assumption 4. Fix a minimal row Ai∗ = Rk∗. Because 

Ai∗ is minimal, it cannot be the Boolean OR of two or more distinct rows among { eRr∗}mr=1 . Hence there is a unique index 

ϕ(k) with eRϕ(k)∗ = Rk∗. This defines a bijection k 7 → ϕ(k) matching the rows of eR to those of R.By Lemma 3, out-anchors correspond exactly to minimal columns, and each such minimal column equals one column of Q.Therefore, in the alternative factorization there is a unique index ϕ′(k) with eQ∗ϕ′(k) = Q∗k.For a factor k, let ik be any in-anchor and jk any out-anchor. We have Aik jk = Qik k ∧Rkj k = 1 and Qik ℓ∧Rℓj k = 0 , ∀ℓ̸ = k. 

In the alternative factorization we have 

Aik jk =

> m

_

> r=1

eQik r ∧ eRrj k .

Because jk is an out-anchor of k and eRϕ(k)∗ = Rk∗, we get eRϕ(k)jk = 1 while eRrj k = 0 for r̸ = ϕ(k). Similarly, because 

ik is an in-anchor of k and eQ∗ϕ′(k) = Q∗k, we get eQik ϕ′(k) = 1 while eQik r = 0 for r̸ = ϕ′(k).Hence the only index r that can produce the 1 at (ik, j k) in the alternative factorization must satisfy ϕ′(k) = ϕ(k). Therefore there is a single permutation P of the factors, with eR = P R and eQ = QP ⊤. This proves uniqueness up to a simultaneous permutation of the factor indices. Interestingly, we note that our assumption shares similarities with assumptions made in the Boolean matrix factorization literature. In particular, DeSantis et al. [2022] obtain a characterization of the notion of “free rank” that can be related to anchors, and Miron et al. [2021] derive a sufficient condition for the uniqueness of the factorization expressed in terms of vector support that also reminds of anchors. More connections could potentially be drawn to obtain more general results. 

B.4 TOWARDS A MORE FLEXIBLE IDENTIFIABILITY RESULT 

We introduce a more flexible condition that does not require that each factor has a in- and out-anchor. We only show a property of this condition, not a full identifiability result. 

Definition 16 (r-disjunctedness) . Columns of Q are r-disjunct if 

∀k ∈ [m], ∀S ⊆ [m]\{ k} with |S| ≤ r, ∃j ∈ [n] such that Qjk = 1 and ∀l ∈ S, Q jl = 0 

In words, every factor can be distinguished from the union of any combination of at most r other factors by at least one parent variable. 

Example: the following matrix is 1-disjunct but not 2-disjunct: 



1 0 1 11 1 0 11 1 1 00 1 1 1



Indeed, for any k̸ = l, the column j = l + 1 mod 4 satisfies Q12 = 0 and Qkj = 1 . 2-disjunctness fails because every column of Q contains exactly one zero, so no column vanishes on two distinct rows simultaneously. Hence for any k and any pair S = {a, b } ⊆ [m] \ { k}, no column j satisfies Qkj = 1 and Qaj = Qbj = 0 .We can of course have a similar definition for the rows of R⊤. Note that considering r = m − 1 defines exactly the in-/out-anchors. Definition 17 (Row and column sparsity) . The row-sparsity of Q is denoted s(Q) = max i

P 

> k

Qik , and similar definition for the column-sparsity of R⊤.

Lemma 9 (Reading Q, R from A). Let’s assume the following points: 

• each factor Z has an in-anchor (resp. out-anchor) 

• the columns of R (resp. Q) are r-disjunct 

• m − 1 ≥ r ≥ s(Q) (resp. s(R))Then (Q, R ) can be read in A.Proof. Recovering R. For all factors Z with index k there exists an in-anchor X with index i, i.e. Qik = 1 and ∀l̸ =

k, Q il = 0 . We can thus read the values of R directly in A (see above). 

Ai∗ is the ∨ of the rows of R. For all variable index i ∈ [n], let’s define Gi = {k : Qik = 1 }. By definition, |Gi| ≤ s(Q).We have the following: 

Aij =

> m

_

> l=1

(Qil ∧ Rlj ) = _

> k∈Gi

(1 ∧ Rkj ) = _

> k∈Gi

Rkj 

Written with row notations: 

Ai∗ = _

> k∈Gi

Rk∗

Uniqueness . For the sake of contradiction, suppose that this ∨-decomposition is not unique. Then there exists T̸ = S

such that |S|, |T | ≤ R and Ai∗ = W 

> l∈S

Rl∗ = W 

> l∈T

Rl∗. Pick h ∈ S\T . By r-disjunctness on the set T , there exists 

j ∈ [n] such that Rhj = 1 and ∀l ∈ T, R lj = 0 . In particular, we have W 

> l∈T

Rlj = 0 . Therefore we have at the same time W 

> l∈T

Rlj = 0 and W 

> l∈S

Rlj = 1 , and thus W 

> l∈S

Rl∗̸ = W 

> l∈T

Rl∗. This is contradictory with the hypothesis we made, so the set G is the unique ∨-decomposition of size at most r.

Recovering Q with S. Let’s prove that ∀i ∈ [n], ∀k ∈ [m], Q ik = 1 ⇐⇒ Rk∗ ≤ Ai∗

• If Qik = 1 , then k ∈ Gi, and Ai∗ = W 

> l∈Gi

Rl∗ so in particular Rk∗ ≤ Ai∗

• If Rk∗ ≤ Ai∗, let’s suppose for sake of contradiction that Qik = 0 , which implies k / ∈ Gi. By hypothesis, we have 

Rk∗ ≤ Ai∗ = W 

> l∈Gi

Rl∗ with |Gi| ≤ R. So there exists no j such that Rkj ≥ W 

> l∈Gi

Rlj , which contradicts the 

r-disjunctedness. Therefore, Qik = 1 .Finally, we have shown that there is a unique possibility for each entry of Q, knowing A, R .A similar proof can be derived for the case where we have out-anchors for each factor and columns of Q are r-disjunct. We suspect that an identifiability theorem can be derived from these weaker conditions and leave it for future work. 

B.5 PROOF OF THEOREM 3 Definition 12 (X -equivalence) . Two f-SCMs M, fM are X -equivalent if they induce the same low-level collapsed mecha-nisms on X , i.e., ∀X ∈ X , F LX = eF LX .

Lemma 4 (Reparameterization symmetry) . Let M be an f-SCM and let (ρZ )Z∈Z be any family of bijections ρZ : Val Z →

Val Z . Define fM over the same f-DAG by eFZ := ρ−1 

> Z

◦ FZ and eFX

 zPa X , u := FX

 (ρZ (zZ )) Z∈Pa X , u. Then fM is 

X -equivalent to M.Proof. Let u ∈ Val U and X ∈ X . We can observe that for x ∈ Val Pa LX ,

eF LX (x, u) = eFX



{ eFZ (xPa Z )}Z∈Pa X , u



= FX

 {ρZ (ρ−1 

> Z

(FZ (xPa Z ))) }Z∈Pa X , u

= FX ({FZ (xPa Z )}Z∈Pa X , u)= F LX (x, u)Hence F LX = eF LX for all X ∈ X .

Definition 13 (Linear parent mechanisms) . An f-SCM has linear parent mechanisms if for every Z ∈ Z the mechanism FZ

is affine: for all x ∈ Val X ,

FZ (xPa Z ) = bZ + X

> X∈Pa Z

aZX xX ,

where aZX , b Z ∈ R, and with at least one nonzero coefficient per factor: ∀Z ∈ Z , ∃X ∈ Pa Z , a ZX ̸ = 0 .

Theorem 3 (Linear parent identifiability) . Let M, fM be two X -equivalent f-SCMs sharing the same f-DAG with out-anchors for all factors, linear parent mechanisms and real supports. Then for every Z ∈ Z there exists a unique bijection ρZ such that ˜FZ = ρ−1 

> Z

◦ FZ , and it is affine: ρZ : zZ 7 → αZ zZ + βZ with αZ̸ = 0 

Proof. Fix Z ∈ Z and let X be its out-anchor. Since Pa X = {Z}, we have Pa LX = Pa Z , and X -equivalence at X gives for all x ∈ Val Pa Z and u ∈ Val U ,

FX

 FZ (x), u = eFX

  eFZ (x), u.

By linearity of the parent mechanisms, we can write FZ (x) = a⊤x + b and eFZ (x) = ˜ a⊤x + ˜b, with a̸ = 0 and ˜a̸ = 0 .Suppose for the sake of contradiction that a and ˜a are linearly independent. Then the affine map T : x 7 →  a⊤x+b, ˜a⊤x+˜b

is surjective from Val Pa Z onto R2. Hence every pair (s, ˜s) ∈ R2 is attained as (FZ (x), eFZ (x)) for some x ∈ Val Pa Z , so the two arguments of FX and eFX range independently over R. From the previous equation we get that for all (s, ˜s) ∈ R2

FX (s, u) = eFX (˜ s, u).

Fixing s and varying ˜s shows that eFX (·, u) is constant, and thus FX (·, u) as well, contradicting the faithfulness assumption for the out-anchor. Hence ˜a = λ a for some λ ∈ R, and λ̸ = 0 since ˜a̸ = 0 .Now, define ρ−1 

> Z

(s) := λ(s − b) + ˜b, an affine bijection of R since λ̸ = 0 . For every x ∈ Val Pa Z ,

ρ−1

> Z

 FZ (x) = λ a⊤x + ˜b = ˜ a⊤x + ˜b = eFZ (x),

so eFZ = ρ−1 

> Z

◦ FZ , and ρZ (z) = λ−1(z − ˜b) + b is affine with slope αZ = λ−1̸ = 0 .Since a̸ = 0 and Val X = R for all X ∈ Pa Z , FZ is surjective on R. Hence, any bijection ρ with eFZ = ρ−1 ◦ FZ satisfies 

ρ−1 = ρ−1 

> Z

on range( FZ ) = R, i.e., ρ = ρZ . In particular, every bijection realizing this relation is affine. 

Definition 18 (Linear child mechanisms) . An f-SCM has linear child mechanisms if for every X ∈ X the mechanism FX is affine in the factors: for all z ∈ Val Z and u ∈ Val U ,

FX (zPa X , u) = bX (u) + X

> Z∈Pa X

aXZ (u) zZ ,

where aXZ (u), b X (u) ∈ R, and with at least one child influenced by factor: ∀Z ∈ Z , ∃X ∈ Ch Z , ∃u ∈ Val U , a XZ (u)̸ =0.

Theorem 5 (Linear child identifiability) . Let M, fM be two X -equivalent f-SCMs sharing the same f-DAG with out-anchors for all factors, linear child mechanisms and real supports. Then for every Z ∈ Z there exists an affine bijection 

ρZ : zZ 7 → αZ zZ + βZ with αZ̸ = 0 such that eFZ = ρ−1 

> Z

◦ FZ , and the coefficients (αZ , β Z ) are uniquely determined. Proof. Fix Z ∈ Z and let X be its out-anchor. Since Pa X = {Z}, we have Pa LX = Pa Z , and X -equivalence at X gives for all x ∈ Val Pa Z and u ∈ Val U ,

FX

 FZ (x), u = eFX

  eFZ (x), u.

As Pa X = {Z}, the linear child mechanisms read FX (z, u) = a(u) z + b(u) and eFX (z, u) = ˜ a(u) z + ˜b(u), writing 

a(u) := aXZ (u) and ˜a(u) := ˜ aXZ (u). Substituting, we get that for all x ∈ Val Pa Z and u ∈ Val U

a(u)FZ (x) + b(u) = ˜ a(u) eFZ (x) + ˜b(u).By faithfulness, the edges Pa Z → X in GL are not spurious, so x 7 → F LX (x, u) = a(u) FZ (x) + b(u) is non-constant for some u′. Since X reaches Pa Z only through Z, this forces both a(u′)̸ = 0 and FZ non-constant. Fixing u = u′ in the previous equation and dividing by a(u)̸ = 0 , we get for all x ∈ Val Pa Z

FZ (x) = ˜a(u)

a(u) eFZ (x) + ˜b(u) − b(u)

a(u) =: μ eFZ (x) + ν. 

Since FZ is non-constant, the right-hand side is also non-constant, hence μ̸ = 0 . Therefore 

eFZ = 1 

> μ

(FZ − ν) = αZ FZ + βZ , αZ := μ−1̸ = 0 , βZ := − νμ .

Define ρ−1 

> Z

: w 7 → αZ w + βZ , an affine bijection of R since αZ̸ = 0 . Then eFZ = ρ−1 

> Z

◦ FZ , and ρZ : z 7 → α−1 

> Z

(z − βZ ) = 

μz + ν is affine with slope μ̸ = 0 .As FZ is non-constant, it ranges at least two distinct points, and an affine map is determined by its values at two points. Hence the relation eFZ = ρ−1 

> Z

◦ FZ fixes ρ−1 

> Z

, and therefore the coefficients (αZ , β Z ), uniquely. 

B.6 PROOF OF THEOREM 4 Theorem 4 (Approximate transformation bound) . If all mechanisms F Θ 

> Z

, F Θ 

> X

are Lipschitz, then ˆ∆ is linearly bounded by 

S(Φ , Θ) .Proof. We instantiate the learned state map componentwise by the learned parent mechanisms: 

∀x ∈ Val X , ∀Z ∈ Z , (ˆ τ (x)) Z := F Θ 

> Z

(xPa Z )

Consider the high-level model to be the learned one HΦ,Θ, with collapsed mechanisms given by 

F H, Θ 

> Z

(zPa HZ , u) := F Θ

> Z



{F Θ 

> X

(zPa X , u)}X∈Pa Z



,

and LΦ,Θ the corresponding low-level model on X . Assume dH (z, z′) = P 

> Z∈Z

∥zZ − z′ 

> Z

∥2, i.e., Euclidean MSE. Fix an intervention i ∈ I L with support I ⊆ X and a context u ∈ Val U .Set x := Solve( Li; u), i.e., x ∼ p(i)

> data

, and 

ˆz := ˆ τ (x), z := Solve( Hω(i)Φ,Θ ; u).

Pointwise propagation inequality. For each X ∈ X , define the (regime-dependent) prediction 

ˆxX := 

(

F Θ 

> X

(ˆ zPa X , u) if X / ∈ IxX if X ∈ I ˜xX := 

(

F Θ 

> X

(zPa X , u) if X / ∈ IxX if X ∈ I

so that ˜xX matches the value of X used inside Solve( Hω(i); u), and for intervened variables X ∈ I we have ˜xX = xX by construction. Define per-variable residuals and per-factor errors 

rX := 1{X / ∈ I} ∥ xX − ˆxX ∥2, δZ := ∥ˆzZ − zZ ∥2.

Fix Z ∈ Z . Using ˆzZ = F Θ 

> Z

(xPa Z ) and zZ = F Θ 

> Z

(˜ xPa Z ), and that FZ is LZ -Lipschitz, we have 

δZ = ∥F Θ 

> Z

(xPa Z ) − F Θ 

> Z

(˜ xPa Z )∥2

≤ L2

> Z

X

> X∈Pa Z

∥xX − ˜xX ∥2.For each X ∈ Pa Z , apply ∥a − b∥2 ≤ 2∥a − c∥2 + 2 ∥c − b∥2 with a = xX , b = ˜ xX , c = ˆ xX :

∥xX − ˜xX ∥2 ≤ 2∥xX − ˆxX ∥2 + 2 ∥ˆxX − ˜xX ∥2

= 2 rX + 2 ∥F Θ 

> X

(ˆ zPa X , u) − F Θ 

> X

(zPa X , u)∥2.

If F Θ 

> X

is ℓX -Lipschitz in its first argument (uniformly in u), then 

∥F Θ 

> X

(ˆ zPa X , u) − F Θ 

> X

(zPa X , u)∥2 ≤ ℓ2

> X

X

> Z′∈Pa X

∥ˆzZ′ − zZ′ ∥2

= ℓ2

> X

X

> Z′∈Pa X

δZ′ .

Combining the last three results yields, for every Z ∈ Z ,

δZ ≤ X

> X∈X

 2L2 

> Z

1{X ∈ Pa Z }| {z }

> =: MZ,X

rX + X

> Z′∈Z

X

> X∈X

 2L2 

> Z

1{X ∈ Pa Z }| {z }

> MZ,X

 ℓ2 

> X

1{Z′ ∈ Pa X }| {z }

> =: NX,Z ′

δZ′

In vector form: 

δ ≤ M r + ( M N )δ, 

where r = ( rX )X∈X and δ = ( δZ )Z∈Z .

Expectation and nilpotency. Taking E i∼P

> u∼Pr

preserves the componentwise inequality, giving 

D ≤ M R + ( M N )D, 

where DZ := E[δZ ] and RX := E[rX ].Because the underlying f-DAG is acyclic, the induced factor-level graph is acyclic, by Lemma 10. The matrix M N has support contained in this adjacency, hence is nilpotent: (M N )γ = 0 for some γ ≤ |Z| = m. Therefore 

(I − M N )−1 =

> γ−1

X

> k=0

(M N )k

is well-defined and entrywise nonnegative. Left-multiplying (I − M N )D ≤ M R by (I − M N )−1 ≥ 0 preserves the order: 

D ≤ (I − M N )−1M R 

=

> γ−1

X

> k=0

(M N )kM R 

Summing coordinates and using any submultiplicative norm (e.g. ∥ · ∥ 1) yields 

ˆ∆ = E

" X

> Z∈Z

δZ

#

= ∥D∥1

≤



∥M ∥1

> γ−1

X

> k=0

∥M N ∥k

> 1



· ∥ R∥1Relating ∥R∥1 to the score S(Φ , Θ) . Under the Gaussian conditional model used for pX 

> Θ

(with variance σ2 

> X

), 

log pX 

> Θ

(xX | ˆzPa X ) = − 12σ2

> X

∥xX − ˆxX ∥2 − cX , cX := 12 log(2 πσ 2 

> X

),

hence, taking E i∼P

> u∼Pr

and summing over X / ∈ I,

S(Φ , Θ) = − X

> X∈X

12σ2

> X

RX − C0, C0 := Ei∼P

h X 

> X / ∈I

cX

i

.

Let σ2max := max X σ2 

> X

. Then 

∥R∥1 = X

> X

RX

≤ 2σ2max 

X

> X

12σ2

> X

RX

= 2 σ2max 

 −S(Φ , Θ) − C0



Combining with the previous bound on ˆ∆ gives 

ˆ∆ ≤ 2σ2max ∥M ∥1

> γ−1

X

> k=0

∥M N ∥k

> 1

 −S(Φ , Θ) − C0

,

which is an affine bound in S(Φ , Θ) .

# C PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

C.1 ACYCLICITY CONSTRAINT FORMULATIONS 

We implement the main differentiable formulations for acyclicity constraints, all of the form h(A) = 0 ⇐⇒ G is a DAG. We consider A ∈ Rn×n 

> +

, for which nilpotence is equivalent to DAGness of G.

Matrix exponential (tr-exp). Introduced by Zheng et al. [2018], this formulation defines: 

hexp (A) = tr  eA − n

where A is the (possibly weighted) n × n adjacency matrix. Computing eA costs O(n3).

Matrix power. This formulation uses: 

hpow (A) = tr 

 

I + An

n

− n

which avoids the matrix exponential but retains the same O(n3) cost due to the matrix power computation. 

Spectral radius. Proposed by [Lee et al., 2019], the spectral radius formulation enforces: 

hρ(A) = ρ A

where ρ(·) is the spectral radius (largest eigenvalue in modulus). The spectral radius is computed via power iteration with T

steps, costing O(T n 2) per gradient step. Nazaret et al. [2024] showed that this formulation is numerically more stable than the tr-exp and matrix power approaches, which we experimentally verify. 

Reduction to the factor graph. Since A = Q ⋄ R⊤ is a rank-m Boolean matrix with m < n , a key structural property allows working with the much smaller m × m factor adjacency: 

Lemma 10 (Lopez et al. [2022]) . G is acyclic ⇐⇒ GX is acyclic ⇐⇒ GZ is acyclic. Consequently, any of the above formulations can be applied to the factor adjacency B = R⊤ ⋄ Q ∈ Rm×m 

> +

instead of the full variable adjacency A ∈ Rn×n. This reduces the tr-exp and matrix power costs from O(n3) to O(m3 + nm 2), and the spectral radius cost from O(T n 2) to O(T m 2 + nm 2), with memory dropping from O(n2) to O(m2).

Spectral radius adapted for the bipartite structure. Lopez et al. [2022] further exploit the bipartite structure to avoid forming B altogether. The bipartite adjacency can be written as the block matrix: 

M =

 0 QR⊤ 0



∈ R(n+m)×(n+m)+

Power iteration on M decomposes into alternating matrix-vector products with Q and R⊤:1. Initialize left and right eigenvector buffers xv ∈ Rn, x f ∈ Rm, y v ∈ Rn, y f ∈ Rm.2. For t = 1 , . . . , T : normalize xf ← R⊤xv /∥R⊤xv ∥, then xv ← Q x f /∥Q x f ∥; symmetrically for y.3. Compute the spectral radius estimate via the gradient formula: 

ρ = y⊤ 

> v

Q x f + y⊤ 

> f

R⊤xv

y⊤ 

> f

xf + y⊤ 

> v

xv

with ∇Qρ = yv x⊤    

> f
> y⊤
> fxf+y⊤
> vxv

and ∇Rρ = xv y⊤    

> f
> y⊤
> fxf+y⊤
> vxv

.Each iteration costs O(nm ), yielding a total of O(T nm ) per gradient step with O(nm ) memory, never forming any n × n

or m × m matrix. The complexity of all approaches is summarized in Table 3. 

Matrix Tr-exp Matrix power Spectral radius Memory 

On Q ⋄ R⊤ Rn×n 

> +

O(n3 + n2m) O(n3 + n2m) O(T n 2 + n2m) O(n2)

On R⊤ ⋄ Q Rm×m 

> +

O(m3 + nm 2) O(m3 + nm 2) O(T m 2 + nm 2) O(m2)

Bipartite spectral radius 2 × Rn×m 

> +

– – O(T nm ) O(nm )

Table 3: Per-gradient-step cost. Here n is the number of observed variables, m the number of factors, and T the number of power-iteration steps for the spectral radius. In practice, in accordance with the insights of Nazaret et al. [2024], we observed that spectral radius methods are less prone to numerical instabilities than other formulation. In particular, we found the bipartite spectral radius formulation to be the most stable and efficient, and is used in all our experiments on non-layered DAGs. 

Layered DAG constraint. When variables X ∈ X are organized into L known layers (e.g., neurons in successive layers of a neural network), we can replace the general acyclicity constraint with a cheap structural constraint that also enforces this ordering constraint. Let ℓ(i) ∈ { 0, . . . , L − 1} denote the layer of variable i. For the graph to be acyclic, it suffices that every factor has all its parents in strictly earlier layers than all its children: 

∀k ∈ [m], max   

> i:Qik =1

ℓ(i) < min   

> j:Rjk =1

ℓ(j).

To make this differentiable, we aggregate the relaxed assignment matrices Q, R ∈ (0 , 1) n×m into per-layer masses for each factor k:

qkl := X

> i:ℓ(i)= l

Qik , rkl := X

> j:ℓ(j)= l

Rjk .

This aggregation is computed in O(nm ) time. We then compute for each factor k a violation score that measures the total mass of parent-child pairs violating the layer ordering: 

bk := X

> lp≥lc

qk,l p · rk,l c .

This is evaluated efficiently using a cumulative sum: letting ¯rk,l := P 

> l′≤l

rk,l ′ , we obtain bk = PL−1 

> l=0

qk,l · ¯rk,l in O(mL )

time. In the binary case, bk = 0 is equivalent to the strict layer ordering; in the relaxed case, bk continuously measures the degree of violation. For scale stability, we optionally normalize by the total mass: 

¯bk := bk

(P 

> l

qkl ) ( P 

> l

rkl ) + ϵ .

The constraint is formulated as the inequality ¯bk − ε ≤ 0 for each factor k, with tolerance ε > 0. The total cost is 

O(nm + mL ), i.e. O(nm ) since L ≤ n.

C.2 CAUSAL GRAPH SAMPLING 

During training, the graph G(Φ) is sampled stochastically at each forward pass. We parameterize the bipartite structure through a single logit tensor W (Φ) ∈ Rn×m×3, where for each variable-factor pair (i, k ) the three categories encode: 0 for a parent edge ( Qik = 1 , i.e., variable i is a parent of factor k), 1 for child edge ( Rik = 1 , i.e., variable i is a child of factor 

k), and 2 for no edge. Sampling is performed with the Gumbel-softmax trick [Jang et al., 2017, Maddison et al., 2017], using straight-through hard samples for the forward pass while allowing gradients to flow through the soft relaxation. 

C.3 ANCHOR CONSTRAINT 

Recall that Assumption 4 requires each factor Z with index k ∈ [m] to have at least one in-anchor and one out-anchor. We formalize this as a differentiable constraint. For in-anchors, the score measuring how exclusively variable i is assigned to factor k as a parent is: 

sin  

> i→k

= Qik 

Y

> ℓ̸=k

(1 − Qiℓ ).

The in-anchor count for factor k is then cin  

> k

= Pni=1 sin 

> i→k

, and symmetrically cout  

> k

= Pnj=1 sout  

> j→k

for out-anchors computed on R.To avoid numerical underflow from the product of many terms close to 1, we compute the scores in log-space using the log-sum-exp decomposition: 

Si := 

> m

X

> ℓ=1

log(1 − Qiℓ + ϵ), log sin  

> i→k

= log( Qik + ϵ) + Si − log(1 − Qik + ϵ),

where ϵ > 0 is a small constant for numerical stability. Si is the total log-complement sum across all factors, and subtracting the k-th term gives the product over ℓ̸ = k without an explicit loop. The anchor score is recovered as sin  

> i→k

= exp(log sin 

> i→k

),and the count is cin  

> k

= P 

> i

sin 

> i→k

.This computation runs in O(nm ) time for all factors simultaneously. The constraint is formulated as: 

Canchor (Φ) := 

> m

X

> k=1

max  τ − cin  

> k

, 0 + max  τ − cout  

> k

, 0 

where τ ≤ 1 is a threshold (we use τ = 0 .99 ). In practice, we impose per-factor inequality constraints τ − cin  

> k

≤ 0 and 

τ − cout  

> k

≤ 0 within the Augmented Lagrangian framework. 

# D EXPERIMENTS 

D.1 IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

Our implementation heavily modifies the open source implementation of Lopez et al. [2022], in particular in the way we solve the constrained optimization problem. Our model is implemented in PyTorch [Ansel et al., 2024]. Constrained optimization is handled by Cooper [Gallego-Posada et al., 2025], which provides an Augmented Lagrangian framework for differentiable constraints. 

Training loop. At each epoch, the model iterates over mini-batches of observational and interventional data. For each batch 

(x, mask , regime ):1. A graph G′ is sampled via Gumbel-softmax from the tensor W (Φ) .2. The model computes predictions ˆx by passing inputs through the sampled factor graph (variables → factors via F Θ 

> Z

,then factors → variables via F Θ 

> X

). 3. The data-fitting loss (negative log-likelihood) is computed over non-intervened variables. 4. Constraint violations (DAG or layer ordering, anchors, L1 sparsity) are evaluated. 5. Cooper’s Augmented Lagrangian solver performs alternating primal-dual updates: the primal optimizer (Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014]) minimizes the Lagrangian, while the dual optimizer (SGD) updates the Lagrange multipliers. 

Constrained optimization. All constraints use an Augmented Lagrangian formulation with inequality constraints C(Φ) ≤ 0.

Hyperparameters. The primal learning rate is selected from {2×10 −4, 5×10 −4, 7×10 −4, 1×10 −3, 2×10 −3} depending on the setting. The dual learning rate is set as 15 of the primal rate. The penalty coefficient ρc is grown at a multiplicative rate of 1.003 or 1.004 per epoch. Batch size is 512 and training runs for up to 50 000 epochs with early stopping: patience of 

2000 epochs begins once all active constraints are satisfied. The L1 sparsity tolerance is set to tol s = 0 .2.

Post-processing. After training, the continuous logits W (Φ) are discretized: for each variable-factor pair, we apply softmax over the three categories and assign the argmax direction (parent, child, or no edge), subject to a minimum confidence threshold on the total edge probability. Acyclicity of the recovered graph is then verified. 

Model selection and evaluation. For each experimental setting, we run a grid of hyperparameters (learning rate, penalty growth) over multiple random seeds and DAG instances. Model selection is performed on a validation set: among all runs that reach feasibility (all constraints satisfied), we select the one with the lowest validation negative log-likelihood. Test metrics are then computed on held-out observational data from the same DAG. 

D.2 METRICS 

We evaluate the quality of the learned causal abstraction by measuring factor recovery. Since factors are identifiable only up to reparameterization, we evaluate whether the learned factors ˆz = ˆ τ (x) align with the ground-truth factors z, using metrics invariant to the admissible symmetry class. • Mean correlation coefficient (MCC): finds the permutation alignment with highest absolute correlation between z and ˆz

averaged over all factors. We report MCC with Pearson correlation (invariant to component-wise affine transformations), Spearman rank correlation (invariant to component-wise monotone transformations), and the Randomized Dependence Coefficient (RDC, Lopez-Paz et al. [2013], invariant to component-wise nonlinear transformations). • Explicitness ( R2): for each ground-truth factor, we fit a linear regression (or a small MLP) from all learned factors and report the variance-explained R2, averaged over factors. R2-linear measures linear decodability; R2-MLP measures nonlinear decodability. Contrary to MCC which is sensitive to linear mixing by a matrix, R2 is not. • Disentanglement, Completeness, Informativeness (DCI) [Eastwood and Williams, 2018]: fits gradient boosted trees from learned factors to each ground-truth factor, extracts feature importances, and computes entropy-based scores. 

Disentanglement measures whether each learned dimension captures at most one ground-truth factor; Completeness 

measures whether each ground-truth factor is captured by at most one learned dimension; Informativeness is the predictive R2.

D.3 SYNTHETIC EXPERIMENTS Data generation. We generate synthetic f-SCMs by first sampling a random bipartite DAG G over n variables and m

factors. Edge probabilities are set so that the graph is moderately sparse (probability of an edge set to 0.1). When anchors are desired, the graph generator enforces Assumption 4 by checking whether they are verified, otherwise the graph is resampled. When variables are organized into layers, factors are constrained to have parents in strictly earlier layers than children. For each DAG, variable-to-factor mechanisms FZ are either linear (weights drawn uniformly from [±0.25 , ±1] ) or nonlinear (two-layer neural networks with tanh activation and standard normal weights, i.e., each weight drawn i.i.d. from N (0 , 1) ). Factor-to-variable mechanisms FX follow the same scheme. When the setting is noiseless, factors and variables are computed deterministically; otherwise, additive Gaussian noise with scale 0.4 is added to variables (factors remain noiseless). Data are generated under hard stochastic interventions: a certain amount of interventional regimes target 1 to 3 variables each, plus one observational regime. Each dataset contains n = 10 000 samples. We generate 5 independent DAG instances per setting to account for graph variability. 

Evaluation. We evaluate UCAD across settings of variable difficulty (all with continuous variables and enforced anchors). We sweep across a few learning rates, dual learning rate, penalty multiplier, and seeds. In the following tables, the DAGness constraint violation may be negative because we target CDAG ≤ 10 −6, and anything respecting the constraint will have a negative violation. Table 4: Summary of results: latent factors reconstruction (MCC-Pearson on test set, mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective after hyperparameter search on validation set). Are FZ , ˆFZ linear? ✓ ✓ × ×

Are FX , ˆFX linear? ✓ × ✓ ×

noiseless, layered 16-3 0.88 ± 0.10 0.80 ± 0.16 

64-6 0.80 ± 0.10 0.93 ± 0.08 

128-8 0.93 ± 0.05 

noiseless, not layered 16-3 0.87 ± 0.16 0.73 ± 0.13 

64-6 0.81 ± 0.06 0.82 ± 0.03 

noisy, not layered 16-3 0.87 ± 0.16 0.82 ± 0.15 0.64 ± 0.04 

64-6 0.76 ± 0.08 0.78 ± 0.11 0.62 ± 0.09 

(a) Linear noiseless, layered (n ∈ { 16 , 64 , 128 }, m ∈ { 3, 6, 8}, L = 3 layers). Both FZ and FX are linear, no noise is added to the variables, and variables are organized into layers (e.g., [4 , 8, 4] for n = 16 ). Table 5: Aggregated test metrics on latent factors reconstruction (mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 80 configs). 16 variables, 3 factors 64 variables, 6 factors 128 variables, 8 factors Metric [4,8,4] [16,32,16] [32,64,32] MCC (Pearson) 0.8826 ± 0.1039 0.7978 ± 0.1033 0.9294 ± 0.0516 

MCC (Spearman) 0.8793 ± 0.1069 0.7932 ± 0.1040 0.9284 ± 0.0516 

MCC (RDC) 0.8842 ± 0.1025 0.8376 ± 0.0785 0.9631 ± 0.0414 

R2 Linear 1.0000 ± 0.0000 0.8424 ± 0.1048 0.9432 ± 0.0488 

R2 MLP 0.9973 ± 0.0003 0.8389 ± 0.1028 0.9347 ± 0.0516 

DCI Info. 0.9962 ± 0.0048 0.8279 ± 0.1113 0.9336 ± 0.0546 

DCI Disent. 0.7638 ± 0.1623 0.6542 ± 0.1544 0.8774 ± 0.0730 

DCI Compl. 0.8354 ± 0.1051 0.6873 ± 0.1388 0.8829 ± 0.0679 

NLL 0.4647 ± 0.0023 0.3360 ± 0.3988 0.0898 ± 0.3083 

DAG Violation −5.48 · 10 −7 ± 2.44 · 10 7 −6.33 · 10 −7 ± 1.59 · 10 −7 −6.18 · 10 −7 ± 1.44 · 10 −7

(b) Linear noiseless, not layered (n ∈ { 16 , 64 }, m ∈ { 3, 6}). Same as (a) but without layer structure. We employ the spectral radius DAG constraint adapted for Q ⋄ R⊤.Table 6: Aggregated test metrics on latent factors reconstruction (mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 80 configs). Metric 16 variables, 3 factors 64 variables, 6 factors MCC (Pearson) 0.8681 ± 0.1615 0.8104 ± 0.0577 

MCC (Spearman) 0.8689 ± 0.1606 0.8084 ± 0.0577 

MCC (RDC) 0.8837 ± 0.1425 0.8289 ± 0.0495 

R2 Linear 1.0000 ± 0.0000 0.8224 ± 0.0638 

R2 MLP 0.9971 ± 0.0007 0.8145 ± 0.0639 

DCI Info. 0.9993 ± 0.0005 0.8123 ± 0.0664 

DCI Disent. 0.7481 ± 0.2056 0.7038 ± 0.1081 

DCI Compl. 0.8791 ± 0.1601 0.7528 ± 0.0816 

NLL −0.4133 ± 0.2107 0.2373 ± 0.1827 

DAG Violation −7.15 · 10 −7 ± 3.04 · 10 −7 −9.17 · 10 −7 ± 1.67 · 10 −7

(c) Nonlinear FZ , noiseless, layered (n ∈ { 16 , 64 }, m ∈ { 3, 6}, L = 3 layers). The learned model uses a 2-layer MLP for 

F Θ 

> Z

while F Θ 

> X

remains linear. No noise is added to variables. Table 7: Aggregated test metrics on latent factors reconstruction (mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 60 configs). Metric 16 variables, 3 factors 64 variables, 6 factors MCC (Pearson) 0.8049 ± 0.1594 0.9317 ± 0.0818 

MCC (Spearman) 0.8037 ± 0.1603 0.9310 ± 0.0827 

MCC (RDC) 0.8249 ± 0.1430 0.9669 ± 0.0482 

R2 Linear 0.8004 ± 0.1630 0.9379 ± 0.0743 

R2 MLP 0.8002 ± 0.1617 0.9352 ± 0.0731 

DCI Info. 0.7998 ± 0.1633 0.9347 ± 0.0779 

DCI Disent. 0.6724 ± 0.2686 0.8985 ± 0.1180 

DCI Compl. 0.7067 ± 0.2431 0.9162 ± 0.0966 

NLL 0.6791 ± 0.2335 0.4676 ± 0.3000 

DAG Violation −5.49 · 10 −7 ± 2.25 · 10 −7 −6.35 · 10 −7 ± 1.72 · 10 −7

(d) Nonlinear FZ , noiseless, not layered (n ∈ { 16 , 64 }, m ∈ { 3, 6}). Same as (c) but without layer structure. Table 8: Aggregated test metrics on latent factors reconstruction (mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 60 configs). Metric 16 variables, 3 factors 64 variables, 6 factors MCC (Pearson) 0.7303 ± 0.1360 0.8232 ± 0.0335 

MCC (Spearman) 0.7424 ± 0.1347 0.8246 ± 0.0348 

MCC (RDC) 0.8139 ± 0.1449 0.8649 ± 0.0577 

R2 Linear 0.7886 ± 0.1632 0.8493 ± 0.0534 

R2 MLP 0.8015 ± 0.1572 0.8500 ± 0.0575 

DCI Info. 0.8141 ± 0.1519 0.8490 ± 0.0605 

DCI Disent. 0.6043 ± 0.2800 0.7240 ± 0.0643 

DCI Compl. 0.6990 ± 0.3103 0.7774 ± 0.0528 

NLL 0.6493 ± 0.3245 0.8417 ± 0.2454 

DAG Violation −5.28 · 10 −7 ± 3.13 · 10 −7 −6.18 · 10 −7 ± 2.57 · 10 −7

(e) Nonlinear FZ , noisy, not layered (n ∈ { 16 , 64 }, m ∈ { 3, 6}). Same as (d) but with additive Gaussian noise (scale 0.4)on variables. Table 9: Aggregated test metrics on latent factors reconstruction (mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 60 configs). Metric 16 variables, 3 factors 64 variables, 6 factors MCC (Pearson) 0.8219 ± 0.1454 0.7808 ± 0.1056 

MCC (Spearman) 0.8212 ± 0.1440 0.7801 ± 0.1056 

MCC (RDC) 0.8894 ± 0.1030 0.8027 ± 0.0939 

R2 Linear 0.7948 ± 0.1453 0.7907 ± 0.1268 

R2 MLP 0.8069 ± 0.1485 0.7981 ± 0.1241 

DCI Info. 0.8138 ± 0.1491 0.7925 ± 0.1279 

DCI Disent. 0.6951 ± 0.1992 0.6768 ± 0.1407 

DCI Compl. 0.7851 ± 0.1620 0.7333 ± 0.1111 

NLL 1.3214 ± 0.0647 1.3704 ± 0.0359 

DAG Violation −8.28 · 10 −7 ± 1.43 · 10 −7 −6.16 · 10 −7 ± 2.32 · 10 −7

(f) Nonlinear FX , noisy, not layered (n ∈ { 16 , 64 }, m ∈ { 3, 6}). The learned model uses a 2-layer MLP for F Θ 

> X

while 

F Θ 

> Z

remains linear. Table 10: Aggregated test metrics on latent factors reconstruction (mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 60 configs). Metric 16 variables, 3 factors 64 variables, 6 factors MCC (Pearson) 0.8650 ± 0.1565 0.7616 ± 0.0808 

MCC (Spearman) 0.8660 ± 0.1563 0.7725 ± 0.0838 

MCC (RDC) 0.8791 ± 0.1405 0.8571 ± 0.0410 

R2 Linear 0.8581 ± 0.1570 0.8624 ± 0.0931 

R2 MLP 0.8574 ± 0.1553 0.8752 ± 0.0935 

DCI Info. 0.8558 ± 0.1560 0.8346 ± 0.0572 

DCI Disent. 0.7912 ± 0.2474 0.7101 ± 0.0890 

DCI Compl. 0.8332 ± 0.1979 0.7893 ± 0.0610 

NLL 1.2294 ± 0.0313 1.2993 ± 0.0531 

DAG Violation −4.21 · 10 −7 ± 3.62 · 10 −7 −6.39 · 10 −7 ± 1.68 · 10 −7

(g) Both FZ , F X nonlinear, noisy, not layered (n ∈ { 16 , 64 }, m ∈ { 3, 6}). Both FZ and FX are nonlinear MLPs. The learned model uses 2-layer MLPs for both F Θ 

> Z

and F Θ 

> X

(hidden dim 16 ). Table 11: Aggregated test metrics on latent factors reconstruction (mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 60 configs). Metric 16 variables, 3 factors 64 variables, 6 factors MCC (Pearson) 0.6366 ± 0.0441 0.6248 ± 0.0892 

MCC (Spearman) 0.6247 ± 0.0472 0.6453 ± 0.0936 

MCC (RDC) 0.6955 ± 0.0338 0.7916 ± 0.0531 

R2 Linear 0.6237 ± 0.0067 0.6036 ± 0.0695 

R2 MLP 0.6524 ± 0.0137 0.6770 ± 0.0647 

DCI Info. 0.6566 ± 0.0121 0.6871 ± 0.0623 

DCI Disent. 0.5131 ± 0.0682 0.5523 ± 0.1130 

DCI Compl. 0.6043 ± 0.1008 0.6324 ± 0.0958 

NLL 1.2558 ± 0.0622 1.4137 ± 0.0449 

DAG Violation −2.46 · 10 −7 ± 4.86 · 10 −7 −7.05 · 10 −7 ± 2.87 · 10 −7

In the case where we expect the f-SCM to be recoverable up to linear reparametrization (i.e., when FX and/or FZ are affine), a perfect MCC-Pearson of 1 is theoretically attainable. We observe that the performance of our model is fairly invariant to the number of variables ( 16 , 64 or 128 ) and factors ( 3, 6 or 8), to whether the DAG has a layered structure or not, and to whether additive Gaussian noise is added on the variables. When averaging over all these cases (13 experiments) we measure an average MCC (Pearson) of 0.83 . Importantly, the variability we observe between all cases does not seem to depend on whether both FX , F Z are linear or only one of them. In the case where both FX , F Z are non-linear, we can only recover the factors up to an arbitrary bijective transformation, which results in a drop of MCC-Pearson. The MCC-RDC score remains high, at 0.79 in the 64 variables case, and 0.70 in the 16 variables case. We note however that DCI metrics and R2-MLP, which are also metrics that should not be sensitive to non-linear transformations, are not matching this trend. Since the variance of MCC-RDC remains low, it does not look like a seed artefact, and experiments on more graphs are needed to understand where this discrepancy comes from. Ablations. We report additional experiments. 

(h) Both FZ , F X are linear, noiseless, not layered (n = 64 , m = 6 ). The model is trained only on the observational regime, and tested on held-out observational samples. Table 12: Aggregated test metrics on latent factors reconstruction (mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 60 configs). Metric 64 variables, 6 factors MCC (Pearson) 0.8330 ± 0.0751 

MCC (Spearman) 0.8300 ± 0.0755 

MCC (RDC) 0.8617 ± 0.0571 

R2 Linear 0.8874 ± 0.0351 

R2 MLP 0.8688 ± 0.0613 

DCI Info. 0.8624 ± 0.0661 

DCI Disent. 0.7093 ± 0.1152 

DCI Compl. 0.7423 ± 0.0984 

NLL 0.0988 ± 0.4957 

DAG Violation −8.31 · 10 −7 ± 1.51 · 10 −7

We observe performances similar to the case where the model is also trained on interventional regimes. This setting may be simple, but still clearly hints at a good robustness of the model when only trained on observational data. 

(i) Both FZ , F X are linear, noiseless, not layered (n = 64 , m = 6 ). The model is trained on a subset of interventional regimes and tested on new ones. Following the code of Lopez et al. [2022], each interventional regime has a fixed target set of 1 to 3 observed variables. Targeted variables are replaced by a new Normal (0 , 1) draw, and non-target variables are simulated by the equations of the f-SCM. In total, 64 interventional regimes are created. Training samples are generated by the observational regime and 46 interventional regimes, validation is computed on 6 separate regimes, while test metrics are computed on 12 separate regimes. Table 13: Aggregated test metrics on latent factors reconstruction (mean ± std, over 5 DAGs, of the model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 60 configs). Metric 64 variables, 6 factors MCC (Pearson) 0.8502 ± 0.0987 

MCC (Spearman) 0.8471 ± 0.0989 

MCC (RDC) 0.8894 ± 0.0692 

R2 Linear 0.8715 ± 0.0830 

R2 MLP 0.8704 ± 0.0886 

DCI Info. 0.8648 ± 0.0942 

DCI Disent. 0.7590 ± 0.1489 

DCI Compl. 0.7798 ± 0.1319 

NLL 0.2530 ± 0.3849 

DAG Violation −7.36 · 10 −7 ± 2.04 · 10 −7

We observe performances similar to the case where the model is tested on held-out observational regimes. This setting may be simple, but still clearly hints at a good robustness of the abstractions when tested on new interventional regimes. D.4 INTERPRETABILITY 

We consider the problem of classifying whether an integer n ∈ { 0, . . . , 999 , 999 } is divisible by 6. The input is the base-10 representation (d0, . . . , d K−1) ∈ { 0, . . . , 9}K with K = 6 digits (from ones to hundred-thousands), and the label is y = 1[6 | n] ∈ { 0, 1}. Each digit dk is encoded as a 10 -dimensional one-hot vector, giving an input dimension of 

K × 10 = 60 .We train a fully-connected MLP with architecture [60 , 32 , 32 , 32 , 1] : three hidden layers of 32 neurons with ReLU activations, followed by a single output logit trained with binary cross-entropy loss. Training uses the Adam optimizer (learning rate 

10 −3, batch size 128 ) with early stopping (patience 25 , up to 200 epochs) on an 80 /20 train/test split of all 10 6 integers. The network reaches an almost perfect test accuracy. We view the trained MLP as a low-level SCM L whose endogenous variables X are the post-ReLU activations of all hidden neurons, giving n = |X | = 32 + 32 + 32 = 96 variables. The causal graph GL of L is determined by the network connectivity: every neuron in hidden layer ℓ is a parent of every neuron in hidden layer ℓ + 1 (and the last hidden layer feeds into the logit), forming a strictly layered DAG with layer sizes [32 , 32 , 32] . The mechanisms FL are the trained affine maps composed with ReLU (or identity for the logit), and the context UL corresponds to the input n (encoded as one-hot). Since the network is deterministic, the context (here, the input of the network) fully determines all activations. To collect interventional data, we perform hard interventions on each of the 96 hidden neurons individually (excluding the output logit). For each neuron Xj in hidden layer ℓ, we clamp its post-ReLU activation to a value resampled from its empirical training distribution and record the resulting activations of all downstream neurons. Concretely, for a subsample of 

500 inputs per intervention, we perform a forward pass where Xj is replaced by a draw from its marginal: Xj ← ˜xj , with 

˜xj sampled uniformly from the training-set values of Xj . This yields 96 × 500 = 48 , 000 interventional samples, combined with 200 , 000 observational samples (test-set forward passes) for a total of 248 , 000 samples. Among the 248 , 000 samples, 80% are used to train UCAD, and 20% are used for validation and model selection. We build a separate held-out observational set of 1, 000 samples for test, on which we report the metrics below. When applying UCAD we search over m ∈ { 2, 3} factors, and select the model with the lowest validation NLL among runs that achieved constraint feasibility (DAG, anchor, and sparsity constraints). We evaluate the learned factors against positive 

concepts: c2 = 1[2 | n], c3 = 1[3 | n], c6 = 1[6 | n], and ˜c3 = P 

> k

dk (the sum of all digits, an intermediate quantity involved in the intuitive computation of divisibility by 3); and negative controls: 1[5 | n], 1[7 | n], 1[11 | n]. Results are reported in Table 14 below. We measure a stronger reconstruction of hypothesized concepts than with negative controls (average MCC-RDC of 0.72 vs. 

0.07 over 5 experiments). In particular, one of the factors has an average Pearson correlation of 0.80 with c2, which is a strong signal that it is consistently implemented by the network. Reasonably high MCC-RDC coefficients can be observed for c6 and c3, especially compared to negative controls which are not reconstructed as well. Interestingly, the negative control c5 is reconstructed by one of the factors as much as the sum of all digits ˜c3 (average MCC-RDC of 0.14 vs. 0.16 ). These results remain difficult to interpret, keeping in mind that our intuitive method to compute c3 is recursive. Furthermore, a low agreement with some concept may not necessarily indicate a failure of UCAD, but could simply mean that the DNN implements a different strategy to solve the problem, for example a heuristic that works only up to 1 million that might sometimes rely on divisibility by 5 for some reason. This illustrates the difficulty of validating such a method: we look for tasks where we expect the DNN to implement a given logic, but our method might unveil that the network implements a different algorithm compared to what was expected. Thus, more work is required to interpret the factors that were learned. 

# E ADDITIONAL ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The disks from Figure 1 are freely adapted from Figure 1 of Deleu et al. [2023]. Table 14: Aggregated test metrics assessing the reconstruction of positive and negative concepts by learned latent factors for the divisibility-by-6 task (mean ± std over 5 trained MLPs, of the UCAD model achieving the lowest feasible objective among 60 configs). Metric 96 variables, 3 factors, [32, 32, 32] NLL −0.2955 ± 0.3008 

DAG Violation 1.84 · 10 −6 ± 3.98 · 10 −6

Positive concepts 

MCC (Pearson) 0.4072 ± 0.0904 

MCC (Spearman) 0.4212 ± 0.0659 

MCC (RDC) 0.7210 ± 0.0517 

R2 Linear 0.2619 ± 0.0703 

R2 MLP 0.5948 ± 0.0305 

Per-concept best Pearson correlation (positive concepts) 

Divisibility by 2 0.8046 ± 0.1805 

Divisibility by 3 0.0581 ± 0.0563 

Divisibility by 6 0.3688 ± 0.0892 

Sum of all digits 0.1098 ± 0.0367 

Per-concept best RDC coefficient (positive concepts) 

Divisibility by 2 0.8818 ± 0.0768 

Divisibility by 3 0.3161 ± 0.1088 

Divisibility by 6 0.5451 ± 0.1323 

Sum of all digits 0.1575 ± 0.0320 

Negative controls 

MCC (Pearson) 0.0261 ± 0.0093 

MCC (Spearman) 0.0284 ± 0.0093 

MCC (RDC) 0.0654 ± 0.0130 

R2 Linear 0.0022 ± 0.0016 

R2 MLP 0.0269 ± 0.0217 

Per-concept best Pearson correlation (negative controls) 

Divisibility by 5 0.0614 ± 0.0316 

Divisibility by 7 0.0121 ± 0.0064 

Divisibility by 11 0.0131 ± 0.0069 

Per-concept best RDC coefficient (negative controls) 

Divisibility by 5 0.1416 ± 0.0350 

Divisibility by 7 0.0679 ± 0.0330 

Divisibility by 11 0.0292 ± 0.0045