Title: CRAFT: A Unified Counterfactual Reasoning Framework for Tabular Question Answering and Fact Verification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.06842v1

Published Time: Mon, 08 Jun 2026 00:26:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# CRAFT: A Unified Counterfactual Reasoning Framework for Tabular Question Answering and Fact Verification 

Chenshuo Pan 1, Yu Zhao 1, Jie Zhang 1, Changzai Pan 1,Zhenhe Wu 1, Jiayi Liang 1, Yujie Mao 1,

Shuangyong Song 1, Yongxiang Li 1, Zhongjiang He 1 

> 1

Xingchen AGI Lab,China Telecom Artificial Intelligence Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd 

Abstract 

Table reasoning remains challenging for large language models (LLMs), particularly in tasks that require multi-step inference over long and structured tables. Existing approaches predominantly rely on single-direction rea-soning, which limits their ability to ex-plore alternative hypotheses across tasks. In this work, we propose CRAFT , a unified 

Counterfactual Reasoning Framework that re-formulates Tabular question answering and fact verification into a general bidirectional veri-fication process. Our method explicitly con-structs both declarative statements and their counterfactual variants. Evidence is then ex-tracted from reasoning along both the origi-nal and counterfactual paths, and integrated via a weighted mechanism to arrive at the fi-nal answer. Experimental results show that our approach consistently surpasses representa-tive baselines on table reasoning datasets such as WikiTQ and TabFact, achieving especially large improvements on complex question an-swering. Our framework also significantly miti-gates performance gaps between different back-bone LLMs. This indicates that counterfactual reasoning effectively overcomes the limitations of single-direction inference, guiding LLMs toward more discerning reasoning and estab-lishing a more principled paradigm for struc-tured reasoning tasks. Our code will be made publicly available upon acceptance. 

1 Introduction 

Tables are a representative form of structured data and are widely found in financial reports, statistical yearbooks, and various domain-specific knowledge bases (Liu et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2021b). Com-pared to natural language text, tables organize infor-mation explicitly through row–column structures, which poses challenges for data localization, sym-bolic computation, and entity linking(Fang et al., 2024; DU, 2025). Understanding and reasoning over tables has become an important research topic in natural language processing, with table question answering (QA) and table fact verification (FV) as two representative tasks. To reason over tabu-lar information, Large Language Models(LLMs) must interpret not only natural language questions but also the structural relations across rows and columns(Liu et al., 2023b; Ruan et al., 2024). This requires the ability to perform operations such as cross-cell comparison and numerical reasoning to produce reliable inference results (Badaro et al., 2023). Recent work addresses tabular reasoning chal-lenges through two main strategies. One line of research improves table understanding at the pa-rameter level by incorporating table-specific induc-tive bias through pre-training or fine-tuning LLMs (Herzig et al., 2020; Su et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025b), which is typically computationally expen-sive. Other research promote explicit reasoning and prompt engineering for sub-table extraction (Ye et al., 2023; Sui et al., 2024; Nahid and Rafiei, 2024; Wang et al., 2024) to break down questions into verifiable statements without updating model parameters (Wei et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2025). Critique-based methods such as posterior self-critique (Yu et al., 2025) and consistency-based aggregation (Ji et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b) have recently proven effective for TableQA by detecting and correcting errors. Nev-ertheless, the performance gain of repeated single-direction reasoning often reduce rapidly as the num-ber of iterations increases. This suggests that rea-soning in a single direction is insufficient for robust table understanding. To effectively challenge ini-tial premises, it is crucial to explicitly integrate counterfactual analysis into the reasoning process, which received little attention in previous studies. To bridge this gap, we propose CRAFT , a novel counterfactual reasoning framework for tabular data. CRAFT jointly constructs both supporting 

> arXiv:2606.06842v1 [cs.CL] 5 Jun 2026

Self -Critic 

Our Method                       

> Rewriter
> Step 0:
> Using LLM to locate
> potential answers or a
> random value from
> Table (only for QA).
> Step 2:
> Simultaneously apply any
> reasoning framework to
> infer both statements.
> Step 3: Extract evidences
> relevant to the original
> question, and generate
> answers
> Step 4: Evaluate each
> answer –evidence pair, then
> make final decision.
> Solution :Japan (JPN) has 77 bronze
> medals, which is more than China’s
> 33 bronze medals.
> Original Question (𝑸 )：
> which nation(s) won more bronze medals than China ？
> Japan won more bronze medals than China
> Not only Japan won more bronze medals
> than China
> Reverser
> Step 1:
> The statements
> obtained in step 0
> are transformed into
> counterfactual
> statements
> Evidence :Japan
> won 77 bronze
> medals, while
> China won 33
> bronze medals .Answer :Japan(JPN)
> Evidence :...Both
> Korea and Japan
> won more than
> 33 bronze medals,
> with Korea
> earning 65.
> Answer: Japan(JPN)
> & South Korea(KOR)
> Reverse provides a
> more complete
> evidence chain.
> Answer ：
> Japan JPN
> Rethinker
> Final answer ：
> Japan(JPN) &
> South Korea(KOR)
> Step iis incorrect
> Generator Solution Judge
> Stepwise Feedback

Original Table ( 𝑻 ) : 

> Extractor

Figure 1: Overview of CRAFT, a multi-agent framework for table reasoning, Rewriter forms an initial statement from question, Reverser derives a counterfactual-inspired reverse statement to create a complementary reasoning path, Extractor gathers evidence and predictions from both paths, and Rethink jointly evaluates and generates the final answer. 

and counterfactual evidence chains to systemati-cally explore alternative scenarios. Under each assumption, distinct reasoning chains are executed by LLMs, with the resulting evidence then aggre-gated to synthesize a final answer. This eliminates the need for extensive, task-specific pipeline en-gineering, offering a versatile solution for both table-based question answering and fact verifica-tion. By addressing the brittleness of unidirectional reasoning, CRAFT offers a principled approach ad-vancing toward more structured and reliable table comprehension. Specifically, we incorporate four cooperative modules: 1) Rewriter reformulates the original question into a declarative hypothesis and trans-forms the problem into a verifiable claim. 2) Re-verser applies targeted transformation rules to this hypothesis to generate an informative counterfac-tual statement, creating a complementary scenario for reasoning. 3) Extractor distills essential sup-porting evidence from the intermediate reasoning steps of LLMs, proposing candidate answers under both factual and counterfactual assumptions. 4) 

Rethinker aggregates the extracted evidence and candidate answers to deliberate and arrive at the final, verified decision. The overall framework is illustrated in Figure 1. In summary, our contributions are three folds: • We propose CRAFT, a counterfactual reason-ing framework agnostic to specific task formu-lations and applies uniformly for reasoning over structured data. • Extensive experiments and analyses are con ducted to validate the effectiveness and robustness of CRAFT, which significantly outperforms exist-ing methods and consistency-based strategies in both accuracy and stability. • Our results indicate that counterfactual reason-ing helps guide LLMs away from fixed patterns and toward more heuristic inference, providing a new perspective for the development of trustworthy reasoning systems. 

2 Related work 

Table Reasoning Table reasoning has gained sig-nificant attention, with many studies focusing on modifying model parameters to better adapt to the structural characteristics of tabular data. Among early attempts, TAPAS (Herzig et al., 2020) mod-els row–column relations through structured em-beddings. A parallel line of research trains mod-els on large collections of table-related corpora through pre-training, instruction tuning, or struc-tured fine-tuning, exemplified by RePanda(Chegini et al., 2025), enabling them to acquire tabular se-mantic patterns, alignment behavior, and execution abilities (Liu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2025b; Su et al., 2024).Studies also incorporate reinforcement learning, using feedback signals to further enhance model performance (Aly et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2025; Pan et al., 2026). On the other hand, large language models exhibit strong inherent reasoning abilities, enabling com-petitive performance on table tasks without modi-fying parameters (Brown et al., 2020). Prompting-based strategies have therefore been widely ex-plored as a way to elicit this latent reasoning capa-bility(Zhou et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020). Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022) explicitly encourages models to articulate interme-diate reasoning steps. Subsequent work extends this paradigm to tables by exploiting their struc-tural properties. Chain-of-Table (Wang et al., 2024) achieves this by breaking reasoning into executable sub-steps, where each step builds on the sub-table produced by the last. Other methods condense or reorganize table inputs prior to reasoning to ensure that models operate on compact, task-relevant data (Sui et al., 2024; Nahid and Rafiei, 2024), or in-corporate external symbolic execution frameworks that offload computation and validation to SQL or Python engines (Cheng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2023; Mao et al., 2025), allowing LLMs to concentrate on planning rather than cal-culation. Building further, other studies emphasize multi-round and structural reasoning mechanisms for ro-bustness and corrective capability. Examples in-clude self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025), tree-structured (Ji et al., 2024) and graph-structured reasoning (Li et al., 2025) to enhance stability through multi-branch logical inference. MIX-SC (Liu et al., 2024b) combines textual and symbolic reasoning, while Table-Critic (Yu et al., 2025) introduces critical assessment to allow self-correction of intermediate steps. However, existing table-reasoning methods generally reinforce infer-ence around the original question and do not ex-plore the use of counterfactual reasoning paths for explicit evidence contrast. 

Counterfactual Reasoning Many studies con-struct counterfactual variants of inputs to enhance causal stability (Feng et al., 2021), strengthen out-of-distribution generalization through relation-driven counterfactual contrasts (Yang et al., 2023), and test inference discrimination under atypical reasoning conditions (Webb et al., 2025). It has also been employed for semantic delimitation and self-calibration, such as distinguishing hypothetical from factual knowledge (Li et al., 2023) and im-proving contextual faithfulness through counterfac-tual exemplars in prompts (Zhou et al., 2023b). The Direct–Indirect Reasoning (Zhang et al., 2025c) framework provides a more general paradigm for solving mathematical problems by jointly incor-porating forward and reverse verification. Kim introduces Counterfactual-Consistency Prompting (Kim and Hwang, 2025), which constructs tempo-ral counterfactual questions to enforce consistency, showing strong performance in relative temporal reasoning. However, this approach relies exclu-sively on counterfactual and mainly to be effective for time-related verification tasks. To our knowl-edge, counterfactual reasoning has not been ex-plored in table reasoning, even though the struc-tured nature of tabular data makes it naturally com-patible to counterfactual validation. 

3 Method 

Notation and Definitions. The overall framework of CRAFT consists of four modules—R EWRITER ,REVERSER , E XTRACTOR , and R ETHINKER . To formalize the problem setting, we denote the ta-ble as T , ground-truth answer as A, the natural-language question as Q, and the declarative state-ment derived from Q as S. In table fact verification (FV), the input is already a declarative claim, and we have S = Q.

3.1 Rewriter 

Rewriter module is designed to transform an open-end table QA task into an informative and verifiable declarative statement that facilitates the subsequent generation of counterfactual statement. Formally, the Rewriter process can be written as: 

a ∼ ΩT,Q := { v | τ (v) = τAQ }. (1a) 

S = M(Q, a ). (1b) We first infer the expected answer type τAQ

from the semantics of Q alone, without refer to any ground-truth answer at inference time. Here, 

τAQ denotes the semantic type expected by Q (e.g., time, number, or boolean), and τ (v) denotes the semantic type of a candidate value v. Accordingly, 

ΩT,Q denotes the type-consistent candidate value space induced by T and Q. An atomic value ais sampled from this space and used to instanti-ate the semantic slot in Q, yielding a declarative statement S. In practice, the LLM is prompted to infer a from cells in T . When no explicit cell is available, it may randomly instantiate an a with a type-consistent value grounded in T and Q.Unlike prior work that primarily uses QA pairs to improve fact verification (Aly et al., 2023), our REWRITER explicitly bridges QA and FV by trans-forming a question into a declarative statement S

via type-consistent instantiation. In this way, QA is recast into the same statement-based form as FV, allowing the downstream modules to function uniformly across both tasks. 

3.2 Reverser 

The Reverser module takes a declarative statement 

S as input and aims to construct an optimal coun-terfactual statement R∗. Counterfactual reasoning is not a simple binary flip; instead, a statement S

may admit multiple counterfactual directions. In particular, when the Q is available, S may carry latent semantics beyond its surface form, so the admissible counterfactual directions should be de-fined with respect to the joint semantics of (Q, S ).For clarity, we denote counterfactuals instantiated along different directions by Ri = ϕδi (S), where 

δi simply indexes distinct admissible directions un-der the semantic context. Prior work has shown that models may underutilize information depend-ing on input position or presentation (Liu et al., 2024a; Wan et al., 2025).Therefore, we introduce the notion of a latent reasoning space Ψ( ·) to de-note the latent reasoning space induced by a declar-ative statement during inference. Under this no-tation, counterfactuals constructed along different directions are characterized by inducing different reasoning subspaces: 

δi̸ = δj ⇒ Ψ( Ri)̸ = Ψ( Rj ). (2) The purpose of introducing counterfactuals is to broaden the reasoning space beyond that induced by S alone. We characterize the optimal counter-factual R∗ as the one whose induced reasoning, when considered together with that of S, provides the greatest overall informational contribution: 

R∗ = arg max  

> i

G(Ψ( S) ∪ Ψ( Ri)) . (3) To construct an informative reverse statement 

R∗, we first generate a small set of candidate coun-terfactuals from S using a rule-based template set derived from statement semantics (and the original question Q when available), ensuring that the can-didates remain plausible and semantically aligned with the original statement. We then prompt the model to generate a SQL-style verification pro-gram for S and each reverse candidate, conditioned on the table’s column names and the entities men-tioned in the statement, and use the resulting pro-gram structure as a proxy for the induced reasoning space. The final reverse statement R∗ is selected as the candidate whose induced program yields the largest structural expansion beyond that of S.While more advanced SQL generation techniques may further improve performance, we intention-ally adopt a lightweight generation strategy in this work. More implementation details are provided in Appendix D.1. 

3.3 Extractor 

Extractor aims to produce both supporting evidence 

E and candidate answers A for the original ques-tion Q. Given the rewrite statement S and the coun-terfactual statement R∗, the model is prompted to perform step-by-step reasoning grounded in the ta-ble T 1, resulting in two reasoning traces, Trace( S)

and Trace( R∗). Each reasoning trace is treated as an instantiation of the corresponding latent reason-ing space Ψ( X).We collect evidence from each trace as follows: 

IT,Q (e) = 

(

1, if e is consistent w.r.t. (T, Q ),

0, otherwise ,E(X) = X

> e∈Trace( X)

IT,Q (e), X ∈ { S, R ∗}.

(4) Here, IT,Q (e) using an LLM to evaluate whether a candidate evidence item e appearing in Trace( X)

is logically consistent under the table–question con-text (T, Q ) and informative for answering the ques-tion. Items that fail this check are discarded, while those with IT,Q (e) = 1 are accumulated along the trace to form the evidence associated with X, de-noted E(X).Applying this procedure to the two traces yields two evidence sets, E1 = E(S) and E2 = E(R∗),corresponding to the Rewriter and Reverser rea-soning processes, respectively. Each evidence set is subsequently used together with the orig-inal question and table to produce a candidate                                                                                                                   

> 1We implement our method within the Table-Critic frame-work for execution convenience, but our approach can be deployed within other table reasoning systems as well. Method Deepseek-R1-14B Qwen2.5-72B Llama3.3-70B GPT-5-mini Average WikiTQ TabFact WikiTQ TabFact WikiTQ TabFact WikiTQ TabFact WikiTQ TabFact End-to-End 54.3 91.8 57.3 85.6 51.1 83.4 85.2 94.7 62.0 88.9 Few-Shot 70.0 91.3 60.6 86.0 62.0 83.1 85.7 95.1 69.6 88.9 Binder (Cheng et al., 2023) 68.5 89.5 65.5 84.0 57.6 79.9 84.2 94.5 69.0 87.0 Dater (Ye et al., 2023) 71.6 92.1 63.8 89.7 63.3 89.9 84.9 95.9 70.9 91.9 Chain-of-Table (Wang et al., 2024) 75.1 92.7 68.3 89.7 62.1 89.9 86.2 96.0 73.0 92.1 Critic-CoT (Zheng et al., 2025) 75.2 92.5 69.0 89.8 66.8 88.0 86.1 94.9 74.3 91.3 Alter (Zhang et al., 2025a) 67.4 90.5 70.9 87.4 67.8 89.8 –94.6 68.7 90.6 Table-Critic (Yu et al., 2025) 76.3 93.3 77.7 92.9 70.1 92.1 86.7 95.5 77.7 93.5
> CRAFT w/ Chain-of-Table Extractor 77.2 93.6 78.7 92.2 79.9 92.0 87.0 96.7 80.7 93.6
> CRAFT 79.9 94.2 80.4 93.9 81.4 94.1 87.8 96.2 82.4 94.6

Table 1: Performance comparison between CRAFT and representative table-reasoning baselines on WikiTQ and TabFact across multiple backbone LLMs, bold denotes the best performance, while underline denotes the second-highest performance. 

answer via the same large language model, i.e., 

A1 = M(Q, T, E 1) and A2 = M(Q, T, E 2).

3.4 Rethinker 

We design a set of weighted decision rules for the Rethink module. When A1 and A2 coincide, the module directly returns the shared answer. When the two candidate answers differ, we compute self-consistency scores for each (answer , evidence ) pair produced by Rewriter and Reverser, mapping each score into the range [−1, 1] . The module then com-pares the score difference and determines the an-swer according to a predefined set of rules. For cases in which the two candidates cannot be reli-ably distinguished, the model re-evaluates each can-didate under the opposing evidence to test whether its reasoning remains consistent under counter per-spectives. The detailed decision algorithm is pro-vided in Appendix D.2. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets We evaluate the proposed CRAFT on two widely used table-understanding datasets: Tab-Fact (Chen et al., 2020) and WikiTQ (Pasupat and Liang, 2015) TabFact is a table-based binary fact verification (FV) dataset in which the task is to determine whether a given statement is supported by the table. Following prior work, we report binary classifica-tion accuracy as the evaluation metric. In contrast, WikiTQ is a table-based question answering (QA) dataset with short, structured answers. We evaluate performance using the official denotation accuracy. For all datasets, we conduct systematic evalu-ations using several strong base models, includ-ing Deepseek-R1-distilled-14B(Guo et al., 2025), LLaMA 3.3–70B (Grattafiori et al., 2024), Qwen 2.5–Instruct (Qwen et al., 2025), and GPT-5-mini (OpenAI, 2025). 2 The full details of all tested model settings, prompt formats, hyperparameters, and additional experiments settings are provided in Appendix A. 

Baselines We compare CRAFT with three repre-sentative categories of baseline methods: 

(1) Standard reasoning methods typically rely on direct prompting. End-to-End QA feeds the table and the question directly into the model, with-out any explicit intermediate reasoning. Few-Shot QA extends this setting by conditioning the model on a small set of in-context table–question–answer examples, from which the model implicitly learns the desired input–output patterns and reasoning regularities. 

(2) Task decomposition methods decompose table reasoning into structured subtasks. Binder (Cheng et al., 2023) translates questions into ex-ecutable SQL or Python programs, enabling in-terpretable symbolic reasoning. Dater (Ye et al., 2023) follows a parsing–execution–filling process and performs question decomposition at the sub-table level. Chain-of-Table (Wang et al., 2024) incrementally constructs sub-tables, with each step building on the previous one. ALTER (Zhang et al., 2025a) retrieves a relevant subset of data and aug-ments it with schema and semantic information. 

> 2For each model family, we report the best-performing version observed within the models we evaluated.

(3) Critic-based methods refine reasoning through self-evaluation or multi-agent critique. Critic-CoT (Zheng et al., 2025) applies a self-critique stage that reviews and refines generated CoTs to revise erroneous inference. Table-Critic (Yu et al., 2025) adopts an agentic multi-stage work-flow that iteratively evaluates, critiques, and revises intermediate reasoning steps to enhance logical consistency and reliability. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 1 reports the performance of our method and representative baselines under different backbone LLMs. Across the four backbone LLMs, our method achieves an average of 82.4% on WikiTQ and 94.6% on TabFact, exceeding the strongest baseline by 4.7 and 1.1 points, respectively. This improve-ment is observed for all four backbones. Notably, the largest absolute gain occurs with Llama3.3– 70B, where WikiTQ accuracy increases by 11.3 points over the strongest baseline. In standard baseline settings and at comparable model scales, Qwen2.5-72B consistently outperforms Llama3.3-70B. With our framework in place, however, this ordering is substantially altered: Llama3.3-70B surpasses Qwen2.5-72B on WikiTQ and TabFact. This reversal indicates that our method significantly reduces cross-model performance discrepancies. Beyond absolute performance, the results re-veal two systematic patterns. First, although open-ended TableQA remains more challenging than fact verification, our framework yields larger relative gains on WikiTQ, providing direct evidence that casting QA into a fact-verification–style reasoning paradigm is an effective modeling choice. Second, our method exhibits uniform applicability across a wide range of model regimes, spanning differ-ent model families, different parameter scales, and both open-source and closed-source LLMs. This robustness further extends to different reasoning instantiations: even when executed by a simpler table-reasoning framework such as Chain-of-Table, our method still outperforms other baseline meth-ods, suggesting that it serves as a general reasoning scaffold rather than backbone-dependent optimiza-tion. Taken together, these results indicate that coun-terfactual reasoning functions as a general reason-ing heuristic rather than a task-specific solution. By guiding how models explore alternatives, it pro-vides a more effective way of thinking about table                     

> Method WikiTQ (%) TabFact (%)
> Qwen2.5-72B
> Table-Critic 77.7 92.9 Rewriter only †79.1 92.9 Reverser only 78.8 91.3
> CRAFT 80.4 93.9 LLaMA3.3-70B
> Table-Critic 70.1 92.1 Rewriter only †79.9 92.1 Reverser only 79.7 91.9
> CRAFT 81.4 94.1
> Table 2: Accuracy of Rewriter-only, Reverser-only, and the CRAFT based on both Rewriter and Reverser across different backbone models. †Rewriter differs from the Baseline for WikiTQ but is equivalent for TabFact.

reasoning, leading to consistent performance gains across settings. 

4.3 Ablation Study on Rewriter and Reverser 

As shown in Table 2, we conduct ablation ex-periments to verify the effectiveness of Rewriter, Reverser and their combination. For TabFact, where inputs are already in declarative form. Tak-ing LLaMA3.3–70B as an example, Rewriter-only matches the baseline performance of 92.1%, Reverser-only follows the counterfactual path alone and drops slightly to 91.9%. This difference is as anticipated because counterfactual reasoning delib-erately explores alternative and potentially incor-rect hypotheses. Notably, the comparable accuracy between the two paths indicates that solving coun-terfactual statements can still recover sufficient evi-dence to answer the original question. In TableQA, however, Rewriter-only leads to a substantial improvement, highlighting the benefit of converting questions into declarative statements. The additional gain from combining Rewriter and Reverser suggests a complementary interaction, where counterfactual reasoning broadens the ev-idence considered for the original question. 

4.4 Effectiveness Beyond Repeated-Sampling 

Given that our framework involves one more rea-soning path in structure, we perform controlled comparisons to eliminate the concern that the ob-served gains are merely due to repeated sampling. Specifically, we compare the voting method based on Table-Critic with (1) Self-Consistency (SC) ,which samples N answers for each question and selects the final prediction by majority voting over (a)     

> (b)
> Figure 2: Repeated-Sampling analyses on Wik-iTQ/TabFact. (a) Accuracy comparison between voting methods and CRAFT. (b) Ideal(Pass@K) accuracy up-per bounds compared with our method.

their frequencies; and (2) Confidence-Weighted (CW) , which also samples N answers but aggre-gates them by summing exp( score ) for each unique candidate and choosing the answer with the highest total weight. Here we choose N = 3 to allow a fair comparison within a reasonable computational cost. 3

As shown in Fig. 2(a), on both table question answering (QA) and table fact verification (FV) tasks, our framework, respectively, achieves im-provements of 3.8 and 1.0 percentage points over the best of two voting methods. This indicates that the improvements do not simply stem from ensembling a diverse set of answers. To further quantify the potential benefit of our method, we adopt the Pass@K metric (Chen et al., 2021a) to measure whether the correct answer ap-pears among a set of K generated predictions. Given the set of predictions {ˆy1, . . . , ˆyK } and the  

> 3From this section onward, all experiments use Llama3– 70B unless stated otherwise. Outputs are normalized and format mismatches are not counted as errors, unlike in the main table.
> Figure 3: WikiTQ and TabFact accuracy as the number of self-critic iterations increases, comparing CRAFT with single-direction reasoning.

ground-truth label y, Pass@K is defined as: 

Pass@ K = I(∃ i ∈ { 1, . . . , K } s.t. ˆyi = y) , (5) where I(·) denotes the indicator function. Pass@ K measures whether the candidate an-swer set contains at least one correct prediction, thereby reflecting how many truly solvable cases are covered by the model’s output distribution and providing an upper bound on the achievable accu-racy under K samples(Yue et al., 2025). As reported in Fig. 2(b), we compare our method with repeated sampling of the strongest baseline un-der different values of K. Our method effectively corresponds to K = 2 , since it explicitly constructs two distinct reasoning paths. Under the same set-ting, our method achieves a higher Pass@ K than the repeated-sampling baseline. Even when the baselines are allowed to increase K, they do not match the performance of our approach. This sug-gests that the direction of sampling—i.e., encourag-ing diverse and structured exploration of the reason-ing space—is more important than the sheer num-ber of samples. By guiding the model to explore different regions of table semantics rather than re-peatedly sampling from the same distribution, our method achieves higher coverage of correct rea-soning trajectories with only a small number of candidates. 

4.5 Impact of Self-Critique Iterations 

The relationship between our method and self-critique is examined by analyzing the effect of varying the number of self-critic iterations. In our method, self-critique is used in the Extractor. Fig-ure 3 shows the effect of varying the number of self-critic iterations on task performance. Across both WikiTQ and TabFact, increasing the number # of Reverse Pass@K (%) WikiTQ TabFact          

> 079.9 92.1 185.6 96.1 287.7 96.5 388.8 96.7
> Table 3: Pass@K results when using Rewriter with K
> Reverse (counterfactual) reasoning paths.

of self-critic iterations consistently improves accu-racy compared to the no-self-critic setting, while the performance gain of single-direction reasoning quickly saturate. Notably, even with an increase in the maximum number of self-critic iterations ( rmax ∈ [1 , 10] ) , the performance of single-direction reasoning re-mains below that of our method, which integrates bidirectional evidences from Rewriter and Reverser. At the same time, the performance of CRAFT also improves as rmax increases, indicating that it is compatible with self-critique. These trends suggest that self-critic effectively strengthens individual candidates, while bidirectional reasoning provides additional, complementary gains that cannot be recovered by increasing self-critic iterations alone. 

4.6 Effect of Multiple Counterfactual Statements 

To examine whether multiple counterfactual direc-tions can further improve reasoning coverage be-yond the single-counterfactual setting, we generate 

K counterfactual statements ( K ∈ 1, 2, 3) for each original statement, run the same reasoning pipeline independently on each of them, and evaluate the resulting predictions with Pass@K. As shown in Table 3, increasing K yields consistent but modest gains, with diminishing returns as more counterfac-tual statements are added. Notably, compared with the repeated-sampling results in Fig. 2(b), intro-ducing additional counterfactual-driven reasoning paths leads to larger Pass@K improvements than simply repeating the reasoning process. However, this comes at higher computational cost, and al-though higher Pass@K suggests greater potential benefit from multiple paths, reliably selecting the best one remains non-trivial, which we left for fu-ture work. 

4.7 Performance Across Different Table Sizes 

Large tables pose substantial challenges for large language models (LLMs), as they often struggle to              

> Figure 4: Performance across different table sizes.
> We partition tables into three size groups with thresh-olds: For WikiTQ, small (<2000 tokens), medium (2000– 4000), and large (>4000); For TabFact, small (<500 tokens), medium (500–800), and large (>800).

effectively track, integrate, and reason over long input contexts (Liu et al., 2023a; Ye et al., 2023). To evaluate the impact of table size on performance, we compare our method against two representative baselines, as shown in Figure 4. For WikiTQ, all methods exhibit degraded per-formance as table size increases, a trend that re-flects the growing complexity of reasoning over larger contexts. In contrast, evaluation results of TabFact task show no significant correlation with ta-ble size. A plausible explanation is that it primarily requires pinpointing and validating specific claims against relevant table cells and is less sensitive to overall table scale. Notably, our approach demon-strates superior robustness, consistently outper-forming baselines across all table sizes. It allows the counterfactual framework to maintain computa-tional efficiency as context length increases. 

5 Conclusion 

We propose CRAFT, an explicit counterfactual framework for table reasoning. The method jointly guides an LLM through both forward and counter-factual reasoning paths, which are integrated via a dedicated rethink module to arrive at the final decision. The framework not only delivers substan-tial performance gains but also unifies table-based question answering and fact verification under a shared counterfactual reasoning paradigm. Further-more, the counterfactual perspective provides new insight into how LLMs can be more effectively steered toward structured table understanding. Limitations 

While our framework achieves competitive and en-couraging results, we acknowledge several limi-tations that call for continued exploration. First, We did not conduct experiments with smaller base models such as 3B, because tabular inputs typi-cally require long contexts. Second, our method is tailored to table reasoning tasks. Although the underlying ideas may generalize to other forms of reasoning—such as text-based QA—ensuring se-mantic consistency and generating atomic facts that align closely with ground-truth answers remains highly challenging. Finally, the performance of our RETHINK module still leaves room for improve-ment. While the current results are encouraging, the module has not yet fully realized the potential of counterfactual reasoning. Further refinement is required to maximize its corrective and reasoning capabilities, providing an important direction for future work. 

Ethics Statement 

This work studies a multi-agent reasoning frame-work for table-based question answering and fact verification. All experiments in this paper are con-ducted on publicly available benchmark datasets (WikiTQ and TabFact), which do not contain per-sonal or sensitive information. Parts of the imple-mentation and baseline systems are adapted from prior work and publicly released codebases, with appropriate attribution and in compliance with their respective licenses. We view this framework as a research contribution and encourage its use in set-tings consistent with its intended scope. We there-fore believe that this study complies with the ARR Ethics Policy. 

References 

Rami Aly, Marek Strong, and Andreas Vlachos. 2023. QA-NatVer: Question answering for natural logic-based fact verification. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 8376–8391, Singapore. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Gilbert Badaro, Mohammed Saeed, and Paolo Papotti. 2023. Transformers for tabular data representation: A survey of models and applications. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,11:227–249. Anna Bavaresco, Raffaella Bernardi, Leonardo Berto-lazzi, Desmond Elliott, Raquel Fernández, Albert Gatt, Esam Ghaleb, Mario Giulianelli, Michael Hanna, Alexander Koller, Andre Martins, Philipp Mondorf, Vera Neplenbroek, Sandro Pezzelle, Bar-bara Plank, David Schlangen, Alessandro Suglia, Aditya K Surikuchi, Ece Takmaz, and Alberto Testoni. 2025. LLMs instead of human judges? a large scale empirical study across 20 NLP evalua-tion tasks. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 238–255, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, and 12 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc. Atoosa Chegini, Keivan Rezaei, Hamid Eghbalzadeh, and Soheil Feizi. 2025. RePanda: Pandas-powered tabular verification and reasoning. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 32200–32212, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, and 39 others. 2021a. Evaluating large language models trained on code. Preprint , arXiv:2107.03374. Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W. Cohen. 2023. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from rea-soning for numerical reasoning tasks. Preprint ,arXiv:2211.12588. Wenhu Chen, Hongmin Wang, Jianshu Chen, Yunkai Zhang, Hong Wang, Shiyang Li, Xiyou Zhou, and William Yang Wang. 2020. Tabfact: A large-scale dataset for table-based fact verification. Preprint ,arXiv:1909.02164. Zhiyu Chen, Wenhu Chen, Charese Smiley, Sameena Shah, Iana Borova, Dylan Langdon, Reema Moussa, Matt Beane, Ting-Hao Huang, Bryan Routledge, and William Yang Wang. 2021b. FinQA: A dataset of nu-merical reasoning over financial data. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 3697–3711, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhoujun Cheng, Tianbao Xie, Peng Shi, Chengzu Li, Rahul Nadkarni, Yushi Hu, Caiming Xiong, Dragomir Radev, Mari Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, and Tao Yu. 2023. Binding lan-guage models in symbolic languages. Preprint ,arXiv:2210.02875. Weizheng LU Jing ZHANG Ju FAN Zihao FU Yueguo CHEN Xiaoyong DU. 2025. Large language model for table processing: a survey. Frontiers of Computer Science , 19:192350–. Xi Fang, Weijie Xu, Fiona Anting Tan, Ziqing Hu, Jiani Zhang, Yanjun Qi, Srinivasan H. Sengamedu, and Christos Faloutsos. 2024. Large language models (LLMs) on tabular data: Prediction, generation, and understanding - a survey. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Fuli Feng, Jizhi Zhang, Xiangnan He, Hanwang Zhang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2021. Empowering language un-derstanding with counterfactual reasoning. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 2226–2236, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schel-ten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mi-tra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, and 542 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.21783. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhu-oshu Li, Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, and 175 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638. Rajarshi Haldar and Julia Hockenmaier. 2025. Rat-ing roulette: Self-inconsistency in LLM-as-a-judge frameworks. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 24986– 25004, Suzhou, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Jonathan Herzig, Pawel Krzysztof Nowak, Thomas Müller, Francesco Piccinno, and Julian Eisenschlos. 2020. TaPas: Weakly supervised table parsing via pre-training. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pages 4320–4333, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Deyi Ji, Lanyun Zhu, Siqi Gao, Peng Xu, Hongtao Lu, Jieping Ye, and Feng Zhao. 2024. Tree-of-table: Un-leashing the power of llms for enhanced large-scale table understanding. Preprint , arXiv:2411.08516. Jongho Kim and Seung-won Hwang. 2025. Counterfactual-consistency prompting for rela-tive temporal understanding in large language models. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 1210–1225, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jiaxuan Li, Lang Yu, and Allyson Ettinger. 2023. Coun-terfactual reasoning: Testing language models’ under-standing of hypothetical scenarios. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,pages 804–815, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qianlong Li, Chen Huang, Shuai Li, Yuanxin Xiang, Deng Xiong, and Wenqiang Lei. 2025. GraphOT-TER: Evolving LLM-based graph reasoning for com-plex table question answering. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 5486–5506, Abu Dhabi, UAE. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Jixiong Liu, Yoan Chabot, Raphaël Troncy, Viet-Phi Huynh, Thomas Labbé, and Pierre Monnin. 2023a. From tabular data to knowledge graphs: A survey of semantic table interpretation tasks and methods. 

Journal of Web Semantics , 76:100761. Jixiong Liu, Yoan Chabot, Raphaël Troncy, Viet-Phi Huynh, Thomas Labbé, and Pierre Monnin. 2023b. From tabular data to knowledge graphs: A survey of semantic table interpretation tasks and methods. 

Journal of Web Semantics , 76:100761. Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024a. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , 12:157–173. Qian Liu, Bei Chen, Jiaqi Guo, Morteza Ziyadi, Zeqi Lin, Weizhu Chen, and Jian-Guang Lou. 2022. Tapex: Table pre-training via learning a neural sql executor. Preprint , arXiv:2107.07653. Tianyang Liu, Fei Wang, and Muhao Chen. 2024b. Re-thinking tabular data understanding with large lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 450–482, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Qingyang Mao, Qi Liu, Zhi Li, Mingyue Cheng, Zheng Zhang, and Rui Li. 2025. Potable: Towards sys-tematic thinking via stage-oriented plan-then-execute reasoning on tables. Preprint , arXiv:2412.04272. Md Mahadi Hasan Nahid and Davood Rafiei. 2024. Tab-SQLify: Enhancing reasoning capabilities of LLMs through table decomposition. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-man Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 5725–5737, Mexico City, Mexico. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Ansong Ni, Srini Iyer, Dragomir Radev, Ves Stoyanov, Wen tau Yih, Sida I. Wang, and Xi Victoria Lin. 2023. Lever: Learning to verify language-to-code genera-tion with execution. Preprint , arXiv:2302.08468. OpenAI. 2025. Gpt-5 system card. https://openai. com/index/gpt-5-system-card/ .Changzai Pan, Jie Zhang, Kaiwen Wei, Chenshuo Pan, Yu Zhao, Jingwang Huang, Jian Yang, Zhenhe Wu, Haoyang Zeng, Xiaoyan Gu, Weichao Sun, Yanbo Zhai, Yujie Mao, Zhuoru Jiang, Jiang Zhong, Shuangyong Song, Yongxiang Li, and Zhongjiang He. 2026. Reasontabqa: A comprehensive bench-mark for table question answering from real world industrial scenarios. Preprint , arXiv:2601.07280. Panupong Pasupat and Percy Liang. 2015. Composi-tional semantic parsing on semi-structured tables. In 

Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1470– 1480, Beijing, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, and 25 oth-ers. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.15115. Vyas Raina, Adian Liusie, and Mark Gales. 2024. Is LLM-as-a-judge robust? investigating universal ad-versarial attacks on zero-shot LLM assessment. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7499–7517, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yucheng Ruan, Xiang Lan, Jingying Ma, Yizhi Dong, Kai He, and Mengling Feng. 2024. Language mod-eling on tabular data: A survey of foundations, tech-niques and evolution. Preprint , arXiv:2408.10548. Aofeng Su, Aowen Wang, Chao Ye, Chen Zhou, Ga Zhang, Gang Chen, Guangcheng Zhu, Haobo Wang, Haokai Xu, Hao Chen, Haoze Li, Haoxuan Lan, Jiaming Tian, Jing Yuan, Junbo Zhao, Jun-lin Zhou, Kaizhe Shou, Liangyu Zha, Lin Long, and 14 others. 2024. Tablegpt2: A large multi-modal model with tabular data integration. Preprint ,arXiv:2411.02059. Yuan Sui, Jiaru Zou, Mengyu Zhou, Xinyi He, Lun Du, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. 2024. TAP4LLM: Table provider on sampling, augmenting, and pack-ing semi-structured data for large language model reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 10306– 10323, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. David Wan, Jesse Vig, Mohit Bansal, and Shafiq Joty. 2025. On positional bias of faithfulness for long-form summarization. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 8791–8810, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In Pro-ceedings of the International Conference on Learn-ing Representations (ICLR) . Camera-ready version at ICLR 2023. Zilong Wang, Hao Zhang, Chun-Liang Li, Julian Martin Eisenschlos, Vincent Perot, Zifeng Wang, Lesly Mi-culicich, Yasuhisa Fujii, Jingbo Shang, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. 2024. Chain-of-table: Evolving tables in the reasoning chain for table understanding. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024. Taylor W. Webb, Keith J. Holyoak, and Hongjing Lu. 2025. Evidence from counterfactual tasks supports emergent analogical reasoning in large language mod-els. PNAS Nexus , 4(5):pgaf135. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompt-ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Zhenhe Wu, Jian Yang, Jiaheng Liu, Xianjie Wu, Changzai Pan, Jie Zhang, Yu Zhao, Shuangyong Song, Yongxiang Li, and Zhoujun Li. 2025. Table-r1: Region-based reinforcement learning for table understanding. Preprint , arXiv:2505.12415. Sishi Xiong, Ziyang He, Zhongjiang He, Yu Zhao, Changzai Pan, Jie Zhang, Shuangyong Song, and Yongxiang Li. 2025. Tablezoomer: a collaborative agent framework for large-scale table question an-swering. Vicinagearth , 2(1):11. Heerin Yang, Seung-won Hwang, and Jungmin So. 2023. Relation-based counterfactual data augmen-tation and contrastive learning for robustifying nat-ural language inference models. In Proceedings of INTERSPEECH 2023 . ISCA. Accepted at INTER-SPEECH 2023. Yunhu Ye, Binyuan Hui, Min Yang, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023. Large language mod-els are versatile decomposers: Decomposing evi-dence and questions for table-based reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation Retrieval , SIGIR ’23, page 174–184, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Peiying Yu, Guoxin Chen, and Jingjing Wang. 2025. Table-critic: A multi-agent framework for collabora-tive criticism and refinement in table reasoning. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 17432–17451, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yang Yue, Zhiqi Chen, Rui Lu, Andrew Zhao, Zhaokai Wang, Yang Yue, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. 2025. Does reinforcement learning really incentivize rea-soning capacity in llms beyond the base model? 

Preprint , arXiv:2504.13837. Han Zhang, Yuheng Ma, and Hanfang Yang. 2025a. AL-TER: Augmentation for large-table-based reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Na-tions of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 179–198, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Xiaokang Zhang, Sijia Luo, Bohan Zhang, Zeyao Ma, Jing Zhang, Yang Li, Guanlin Li, Zijun Yao, Kangli Xu, Jinchang Zhou, Daniel Zhang-Li, Jifan Yu, Shu Zhao, Juanzi Li, and Jie Tang. 2025b. TableLLM: Enabling tabular data manipulation by LLMs in real office usage scenarios. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 10315–10344, Vienna, Austria. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yanfang Zhang, Yiliu Sun, Yibing Zhan, Dapeng Tao, Dacheng Tao, and Chen Gong. 2025c. Large lan-guage models as an indirect reasoner: Contraposi-tive and contradiction for automated reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 5040–5057, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Yuchen Zhang, Yuze Gao, Bin Chen, Wenfeng Li, Shuo Sun, and Jian Su. 2025d. High-quality complex text-to-SQL data generation through chain-of-verification. In Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Con-ference on Natural Language Processing and the 4th Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 2368– 2379, Mumbai, India. The Asian Federation of Nat-ural Language Processing and The Association for Computational Linguistics. Yunjia Zhang, Jordan Henkel, Avrilia Floratou, Joyce Cahoon, Shaleen Deep, and Jignesh M. Patel. 2024. Reactable: Enhancing react for table question answer-ing. Proc. VLDB Endow. , 17(8):1981–1994. Xin Zheng, Jie Lou, Boxi Cao, Xueru Wen, Yuqiu Ji, Hongyu Lin, Yaojie Lu, Xianpei Han, Debing Zhang, and Le Sun. 2025. Critic-CoT: Boosting the reasoning abilities of large language model via chain-of-thought critic. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 1768–1806, Vienna, Austria. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. 2023a. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) . Published at ICLR 2023. Wenxuan Zhou, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Muhao Chen. 2023b. Context-faithful prompting for large language models. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 14544–14556, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Appendix A Implementation Details 

All experiments were conducted on a dedicated server equipped with NVIDIA A100 40GB GPUs (×8) with CUDA 12.2. We evaluated our frame-work using multiple backbone large language mod-els. Open-source models including Llama-3.3-70B and DeepSeek-R1-14B were deployed locally us-ing the vLLM inference engine, while GPT-5-mini was accessed via the Microsoft Azure OpenAI API. Unless otherwise specified, we used a tempera-ture of 0 and top-p of 1.0. The maximum genera-tion length was set to at most 2048 tokens. In the main experiments, we selected the number of self-critique iterations r from 1, . . . , 10 based on vali-dation performance, and used the best-performing value. For API-based models 4, due to endpoint con-straints, we set the temperature to 1. In addition, when inference timeouts occurred, we set the rea-soning level to minimum to ensure stable execution, while keeping all other settings unchanged. 

A.1 Output Normalization and Evaluation Metrics 

In our evaluation, post-processing is applied at two different levels, corresponding to the main results and the supplementary analysis, respec-tively. For the main results reported in the pri-mary tables, we apply a strictly minimal nor-malization only to DeepSeek-R1 distilled mod-els (e.g., DeepSeek-Distilled-14B) by removing explicit reasoning traces or special markers (e.g., 

think blocks). No matching or answer extraction is performed, and all other models are evaluated on their raw outputs without any post-processing. This setting is intentionally conservative, ensuring that the main comparisons reflect strict adherence   

> 4We do not report WikiTQ results for gpt5-mini under ALTER because a subset of batches returned empty responses during inference, preventing reliable aggregation of results.

to the canonical answer formats of WikiTQ and TabFact. In the supplementary analysis reported after Section 4.3, we additionally enable a lightweight matching-based extraction on top of the same nor-malization to better reflect practical usage scenarios in which users accept semantically correct answers even when they are embedded in natural language statements. For example, if a model outputs “The answer is X” or similar declarative forms, we ex-tract X and treat it as the predicted answer. Un-like the main results, this matching-based extrac-tion is not restricted to DeepSeek distilled mod-els, and is applied whenever a model’s output is non-canonical but contains an unambiguous an-swer span. Both stages are conservative and purely surface-level: they neither modify model predic-tions nor introduce task-specific heuristics, but only standardize syntactic variants for consistent evalua-tion. 

A.2 TAT-QA Format Alignment and Evaluation Protocol 

For the additional TAT-QA experiments, we do not modify the reasoning procedure or the prompts of any compared baseline. Since TAT-QA is a text-table hybrid dataset, while the evaluated methods are originally designed around table-centric inputs, we only perform input-format alignment to make the dataset compatible with the same evaluation interface. Specifically, we prepend the associated textual context before the table caption in the origi-nal table serialization, while keeping the remaining table content and question format unchanged. The same serialized input format is used for all com-pared methods. To enable a consistent accuracy-style comparison with WikiTQ, we also canonical-ize TAT-QA gold answers into WikiTQ-style an-swer strings and evaluate predictions with the same WikiTQ evaluator. This conversion only standard-izes the surface format of the reference answers, such as answer strings or lists of answer strings, and does not change the semantic content of the gold labels. Therefore, the TAT-QA results reported in the supplementary analysis should be interpreted under this adapted accuracy-style protocol. 

B Additional Analysis 

B.1 Additional Results with Qwen3.5 

We further conduct supplementary experiments with Qwen3.5 on WikiTQ and TabFact. As shown in Table 4, CRAFT achieves the best performance on both datasets, with 86.1% on WikiTQ and 95.3% on TabFact. This trend is consistent with the main results, indicating that the conclusions remain un-changed when using Qwen3.5-27B as an additional backbone. 

B.2 Evaluation on TAT-QA 

We further conduct supplementary experiments on TAT-QA with LLaMA3-70B and Qwen2.5-72B, following the format alignment and evaluation pro-tocol described in Section A.2. As shown in Ta-ble 5, CRAFT consistently achieves the best perfor-mance under both backbones, reaching 71.8% and 73.9%, respectively. This trend is consistent with the main results, indicating that the conclusions remain unchanged in the text-table hybrid setting. 

B.3 Step-0 Candidate Accuracy and Error-Correction Analysis 

To examine whether the performance gain mainly comes from the initial candidate already being cor-rect, we conduct an additional WikiTQ analysis with LLaMA3 over three independent runs. Let y

denote the gold answer, ˆy0 denote the Step-0 can-didate, and ˆy denote the final prediction. Table 6 reports the mean Step-0 candidate accuracy and the corresponding error-correction results. The Step-0 potential-answer accuracy is only 61.5% on average, substantially lower than the final-answer accuracy of 81.3%. This indicates that the final performance gain cannot be explained by simply inheriting a correct initial candidate. In par-ticular, CRAFT corrects 59.3% of initially wrong Step-0 predictions, and 28.1% of final correct an-swers come from cases where the Step-0 prediction was wrong. These results show that CRAFT has a strong error-correction ability: even when the initial candidate is incorrect, the reverse path and the Rethinker can often recover the correct answer by integrating complementary table-grounded evi-dence. 

C Evaluations on Token Consumption 

In this section, we analyze the token consump-tion of the full reasoning pipeline under different numbers of critic evaluations. The reported token counts shown in Table 7 cover the entire process, including candidate answer generation, critic-based evaluation, and final decision making. In our framework, the critic is applied to assess the quality and evidence consistency of candidate Dataset Zero-shot Few-shot Chain-of-Table Table-Critic CRAFT + CoT CRAFT             

> WikiTQ 70.0 71.4 80.0 85.4 85.2 86.1
> TabFact 88.0 86.9 93.7 93.9 94.3 95.3

Table 4: Performance (%) of different methods on WikiTQ and TabFact with Qwen3.5 as the backbone.               

> Method LLaMA3-70B Qwen2.5-72B
> Zero-shot 51.1 57.6 Few-shot 55.9 59.2 Chain-of-Table 56.7 55.1 Table-Critic 61.6 65.7 CRAFT + CoT 68.2 72.2 CRAFT 71.8 73.9

Table 5: Performance (%) on TAT-QA under the same adapted text-table input setting.                           

> Metric Definition Value
> Step-0 Acc. Pr(ˆ y0=y)61.5% Final Acc. Pr(ˆ y=y)81.3% Correction Rate Pr(ˆ y=y|ˆy0̸=y)59.3% Recovered Share Pr(ˆ y0̸=y|ˆy=y)28.1%

Table 6: Step-0 candidate accuracy and error-correction analysis on WikiTQ with LLaMA3, accuracy is aver-aged over three runs. 

answers. We vary the number of critic evaluations from c = 1 to c = 10 , where each additional critic evaluation independently reassesses the candidate answers using the same criteria. As the number of critic evaluations increases, the overall token consumption grows substantially, since each evalu-ation requires reprocessing the candidate answers together with their associated evidence. Beyond raw token counts, we also consider a more realistic cost model that reflects current com-mercial pricing schemes, in which input and output tokens are priced differently. Following the lat-est OpenAI pricing, output tokens are substantially more expensive than input tokens; we therefore normalize token usage by weighting output tokens more heavily. Concretely, we adopt a normalized cost defined as: Normalized Cost = 0 .125 Tin + 0 .875 , T out ,

where Tin and Tout denote the numbers of input and output tokens, and Pin and Pout denote their respective per-token prices. As shown in the main results, using a larger num-ber of critic evaluations generally leads to stronger performance, as repeated evaluation helps reduce unreliable decisions. Therefore, higher values of c

are preferred when computational resources permit. At the same time, even a single critic evaluation (c = 1 ) already consistently outperforms the base-line, without further critic evaluation, while incur-ring substantially lower normalized cost. In addi-tion, introducing Extractor stage based on Chain-of-Table, CRAFT significantly reduces token con-sumption and doesn’t introduce critic, while its performance remains among the leading methods in the main results. These results indicate a clear trade-off between performance and computational cost controlled by the number of critic evaluations. While multiple critic evaluations yield stronger results, using c = 1 

serves as an economical alternative that retains most of the performance gains with substantially reduced token usage under realistic pricing assump-tions. 

D A Pseudocode Description of Rethinker/Reverser 

This section includes pseudocode and brief supple-mentary notes on the implementation of the Re-verse and Rethink modules. 

D.1 The Reverser 

The Reverser procedure is summarized in Algo-rithm 1. To instantiate reverse candidates, we com-pile a small set of commonly used reverse templates based on empirical observation of statement seman-tics. These templates are summarized in Appendix Table 8 and are used to prompt candidate gener-ation while keeping the candidates semantically aligned with the original statement. Given the original statement and each candidate reverse statement, we independently prompt the model to generate a minimal SQL-style query for verification. This design is intended to reduce re-ward hacking during SQL generation: instead of allowing candidates to benefit from arbitrarily long or structurally inflated programs, we explicitly re-quire each statement to be expressed by a minimal verification query. We first elicit the SQL program itself and then Method Input Tokens (M) Output Tokens (M) Total Weighted Tokens (M) Chain-of-Table 73.5 1.6 10.6 Table-Critic 135.5 3.8 20.3 CRAFT w/ Chain-of-Table Extractor 171.2 6.2 26.8 CRAFT ( c=1 ) 234.3 8.9 37.1 CRAFT ( c=5 ) 363.2 21.0 63.8 (a) WikiTQ Method Input Tokens (M) Output Tokens (M) Total Weighted Tokens (M) Chain-of-Table 29.3 0.6 4.2 Table-Critic 62.1 2.1 9.6 CRAFT w/ Chain-of-Table Extractor 71.1 3.4 11.9 CRAFT ( c=1 ) 104.2 4.1 16.6 CRAFT ( c=5 ) 158.9 6.8 25.8 (b) TabFact 

Table 7: Token consumption comparison across different methods on (a) table question answering (WikiTQ) and (b) fact verification (TabFact). Token counts are measured over the full reasoning pipeline, including candidate generation, critic evaluation, and final decision making. Table 8: Atomic rewriting rules and templates.                           

> Category Trigger Rewriter Template
> Tie most / least / highest / lowest / biggest / fastest Prefer multiplicity: “Not only X. . . ” or “Besides X, other entities also . . . ”. Unique first / only / sole / unique / earliest / latest / exactly one Directly negate the named entity / time / place; do not use “not only”. Which which + only / solely / uniquely / all Use multiplicity: “Not only X. . . ”. Value WHEN / WHERE / HOW MANY / HOW MUCH Directly contradict the cited time / place / value, preserving units and context. Compare higher/lower; earlier/later; bigger/smaller Flip to the opposite option; never rewrite as Yes/No. AtLeast at least XRewrite as: less than X.AtMost at most XRewrite as: more than X.Exact exactly XRewrite as: not X.

apply rule-based extraction to derive normalized structural representations from the generated SQL. Specifically, we represent each SQL query using operation–object signatures, where each signature associates a SQL operation with its main object. In implementation, reverse selection is based primar-ily on structural expansion at the operation–object level, namely, the amount of new operation–object structure introduced beyond the original statement. If multiple candidates introduce the same amount of operation–object expansion, we further ask the model to decide which candidate is more helpful for solving the original question. Based on the SQL query patterns and functions discussed by (Zhang et al., 2025d), we summarizes the SQL operator vocabulary and the corresponding object-level ex-traction used in our implementation in Table 9 . 

D.2 The Rethinker 

Using large language models as critics or judges has been shown to be effective, but it is also chal-lenging in practice, as their feedback can be noisy, inconsistent, overconfident, or sensitive to prompt phrasing and context (Raina et al., 2024; Bavaresco et al., 2025; Haldar and Hockenmaier, 2025). As a result, we do not rely on the model’s feedback alone. Instead, based on empirical validation, we adopt a hybrid design that combines model feed-back with simple structural constraints. This design allows us to leverage the model’s semantic judg-ments while preventing unstable or unconstrained revisions. To assess the contribution of this design, we report a simple ablation in which the structural constraints are removed and the system relies solely on model feedback (Table 10). Algorithm 2 pro-vides the pseudocode description of this module. Algorithm 1 Reverser Constructor 

Require: Declarative statement S; optional question Q; table column names C; reverse template set D

Ensure: Counterstatement statement R∗

Step 1: Template matching and candidate instantiation ▷ generate multiple reverse candidates 

1: {δ1, . . . , δ k } ← M MATCH (S, Q, D)

2: for j = 1 to k do 

3: Rj ← ϕδj (S, Q )

4: end for 

5: R ← { R1, . . . , R k }

Step 2: SQL-signature induction ▷ use SQL structure as proxy for induced reasoning space 

6: PS ← M SQL (S, C)

7: ΣS ← EXTRACT SIGNATURE (PS )

8: for j = 1 to k do 

9: Pj ← M SQL (Rj , C)

10: Σj ← EXTRACT SIGNATURE (Pj )

11: end for  

> ▷each signature is represented by operation–object pairs extracted from minimal SQL

Step 3: Reverse selection ▷ maximize structural expansion beyond S

12: j∗ ← arg max  

> 1≤j≤k

ΣS ∪ Σj

13: R∗ ← Rj∗

14: return R∗

Table 9: SQL operator vocabulary and object-level signature construction used in reverse selection. 

Operator Detected from Object-level signature example 

SELECT SELECT ... FROM ... clause SELECT::height , SELECT::max(height) WHERE WHERE clause WHERE::country = ’Germany’ GROUP_BY GROUP BY clause GROUP_BY::country HAVING HAVING clause HAVING::count(*) > 1 ORDER_BY ORDER BY clause ORDER_BY::height DESC LIMIT LIMIT clause LIMIT::1 DISTINCT DISTINCT in SELECT expression DISTINCT::distinct country COUNT aggregation call COUNT(...) COUNT::* , COUNT::height SUM aggregation call SUM(...) SUM::sales AVG aggregation call AVG(...) AVG::score MIN aggregation call MIN(...) MIN::year MAX aggregation call MAX(...) MAX::height CASE CASE WHEN or IF(...) expression CASE::case EXISTS EXISTS clause EXISTS::exists SUBQUERY nested SELECT query SUBQUERY::subquery 

Table 10: Ablation study results comparing R ETHINK 

with a purely model-based prompting baseline on Wik-iTQ and TabFact tasks, using Llama 3 as the backbone model. 

Method WikiTQ Acc. (%) TabFact Acc. (%) Prompt-based 79.9 91.7 RETHINK 81.4 94.1 

∆ ↑ +1 .5 ↑ +2 .5

E Case Study and Prompts 

We provide qualitative illustrations and implemen-tation details for each step of the CRAFT. It is or-ganized to support a clearer understanding of how the proposed method operates, how its components interact, and how its behavior differs from that of prior reflection-based approaches. We first present a detailed case study 5 that traces the reasoning process of our method and con-trasts it with that of a representative self-reflection– based baseline on the same example. By comparing the key intermediate steps under the two settings, the case study illustrates how counterfactual con-struction leads the model to explore alternative rea-soning paths, and how inappropriate intermediate restrictions in prior approaches can result in incor-rect conclusions, whereas the proposed framework reaches a consistent and correct outcome. In a sep-arate example 6 , we further show that CRAFT can still approach the correct solution even when neither the Rewriter nor the Reverser statements include the gold answer. CRAFT leverages the partial but complementary clues uncovered along the two reasoning paths. This allows CRAFT to filter out less reliable candidates, retain the more informative comparisons, and ultimately recover the correct answer through the final evidence ag-gregation stage. Following this, we report the exact prompts used for all modules in CRAFT to ensure transparency and reproducibility. Specifically, we provide the prompts for the Rewriter, Reverser, Extractor, and Rethinker components (see Figure 7). Since the intermediate reasoning traces produced by baseline methods can be directly used as evidence inputs, we only include the Extractor prompt that maps a given piece of evidence to a final answer. This prompt defines how evidence is interpreted and converted into a prediction. Algorithm 2 Rethink Component 

Require: Question Q, table T ; Rewriter (aA, e A); Reverser (aB , e B ); fallback answer abase ; thresholds 

τ, τ swap .

Ensure: Selected answer ˆa ∈ { aA, a B }. 

> 1:

Function SCORE (Q, T, a, e ):  

> 2:

S ← TOSTATEMENT (Q, a ) 

> 3:

(y, α ) ← LLMJ UDGE (S, e, T ) ▷ y ∈ { Support , Contradict }, α ∈ [0 , 1]  

> 4:

if y = Support then  

> 5:

return +α 

> 6:

else  

> 7:

return −α 

> 8:

end if Main-view margin (self-evidence)  

> 9:

sA ← SCORE (Q, T, a A, e A), sB ← SCORE (Q, T, a B , e B ) ▷ s ∈ [−1, 1]  

> 10:

∆ ← | sA − sB | 

> 11:

if ∆ ≥ τ then  

> 12:

return arg max a∈{ aA,a B } s(a) 

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

▷ If ∆ < τ , Stage 1 is inconclusive and we enter Stage 2 

Swapped-evidence  

> 15:

sA↔ ← SCORE (Q, T, a A, e B ), sB↔ ← SCORE (Q, T, a B , e A) 

> 16:

cA ← I[sA · sA↔ > 0] , cB ← I[sB · sB↔ > 0]  

> 17:

▷ c = 1 : sign preserved; c = 0 : sign flips  

> 18:

∆swap ← | sA↔ − sB↔|

Decision  

> 19:

if cA̸ = cB then  

> 20:

if ∆swap ≥ τswap then  

> 21:

return aarg max v∈{ A,B } cv 

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end if  

> 24:

return abase Figure 5: A Case Study Comparing Self-Critique and Counterfactual Reasoning Paths Step 1 — select_row (Critical) 

Process ：Select rows [2, 4, 6] corresponding to Country = 

germany .

This step prematurely restricts the table to only rows explicitly 

marked as Germany, excluding historically relevant or cross -

border cases 

Step 2 –3 — select_column → sort_column 

Process ：Keep building names and height values, then sort the 

selected German buildings by height in ascending order. 

Step 4 — simple_query 

Output ：No 

Name  Country  Town  height ( metres / ft)  held record 

great pyramid of giza  egypt  giza  146 / 480  2570 bc –1311 

st. mary's church  germany  stralsund  151 / 500  1549 –1647 

strasbourg cathedral  germany and/or 

france (today france ) strasbourg  142 / 470  1647 –1874 

st nikolai  germany  hamburg  147.3 / 483  1874 –1876 

notre -dame cathedral  france  rouen  151 / 500  1876 –1880 

cologne cathedral  germany  cologne  157.4 / 516  1880 –1884 

washington monument  united states  Washington, 

d.c  169.3 / 555  1884 –1889 

Rewrite Execution Trace 

The filtered subtable contains only buildings whose country field 

is explicitly labeled as Germany. Within this restricted subtable , St 

Nikolai (147.3 metres ) is lower than St Mary’s Church (151 

metres ).So the model concludes that St Mary’s Church is not the 

least -height building. 

Explanation (retained, compressed) 

Judge 

Decision: Correct 

Reason (explicit) ：The judgment is locally correct under the 

restricted subtable , because St Nikolai is indeed lower than St 

Mary’s Church among the rows retained after filtering. 

Reverse Execution Trace 

Step 1 — select_row 

Process ：Select rows [2, 3, 4, 6]  relevant to buildings in 

Germany, while leaving room for historically or semantically 

related cases .

Compare the candidate buildings and their heights, and look 

for any building lower than St Mary’s Church. 

Step 2 –3 — select_column → sort_column 

Step 4 — simple_query 

Output ：YES 

Judge 

Decision: Correct 

Reason (explicit) ：The counterfactual statement only 

requires a valid counterexample showing that St Mary’s Church is 

not the minimum. 

Since Strasbourg Cathedral provides such a counterexample, the 

reverse reasoning remains valid and robust even when the rewrite 

path is trapped by an early filtering error. 

Considering the broader historical/geographical semantics, 

the relevant buildings include St Mary’s Church (151 metres ), 

St Nikolai (147.3 metres ), and Strasbourg Cathedral (142 

metres ). 

Explanation (retained, compressed) 

Decision: Reverse 

Reason: 

Because the question asks about buildings in Germany , we should consider a broader Germany -related scope. The 

Reverse trace preserves this better than the Rewrite trace .

Final Answer: Strasbourg Cathedral 

Statement ：St Mary’s Church was the least height building in germany 

Question ：what building had the least height in germany ?

> Statement ：St Mary’s Church was not the least height building in
> germany

Figure 6: A Case Study Showing how CRAFT get correct answer when Both Reasoning Paths start with a wrong answer You are a table -aware rewriting assistant. 

Input: 

- A natural -language question Q. 

- A table T given as rows (the first row is the header). 

Task: 

1) Compute answer A strictly from T using only the column(s) implied by Q , If you can’t get answer, 

randomly select answer A following semantic. A must be either: 

(i) a value copied verbatim from a single table cell, or 

(ii) a minimal result of simple reasoning over the target column(s) (e.g., sum, difference, count, date 

difference, comparison). 

2) Rewrite Q into one declarative sentence S that explicitly contains A. 

Rules: 

- Use only T; do not introduce external information. 

- Entity answers: copy exactly one table cell (preserve casing, punctuation, and spacing). 

- Numeric answers: 

* If copied, preserve the unit exactly as in T. 

* If computed, output digits only in A, and express the unit in S (from T or Q). 

- If Q specifies a unit (e.g., “in kg”), do not repeat it in A, but keep it in S. 

- Counting: A is a single number; do not enumerate items. 

- OR -questions (“A or B”): return the selected option/relation as A (never Yes/No) and preserve the OR 

semantics in S. 

- Binary questions (“Did X …?”): A may be “Yes” or “No”; reflect the polarity in S. 

- Multiple values (if required): join with “|”, each value must be a table cell. 

- Time/date: return the exact token from T (no merging across columns). 

Output: 

Return JSON only: {"answer": "<string>", "statement": "<string>"}. 

Question: {question} 

Table: { table_text }Figure 7: Rewriter Prompt Template. You are a logically precise language model. 

Given an Original Question and a Statement, write three one -sentence Counter that plausibly contradicts the 

Statement while being maximally useful for answering the Original Question. 

Rules: 

(1) Target the most misleading or critical claim in the Statement. 

(2) Use the Question’s intent to guide the contradiction; don’t negate randomly. 

(3) Reuse numbers / entities / places / times from the Question / Statement; do not invent specifics. 

(4) Output exactly one concise grammatical sentence: no hedging, no explanations. 

A reverse Template is already selected and provided. 

The placeholders in the Template are the only slots you may fill. 

You must strictly follow the given Template and the examples provided with that Template. 

Now, consider the following: 

Original Question: "{ original_question }" 

Statement: "{statement}" 

Template: "{template}" 

Counter: 

> You are an expert SQL planner for SINGLE -TABLE fact verification.

Given statement S and available column names, write the MINIMAL SQL query 

that is sufficient to verify whether S is true on table " { table_name } ". 

- Do not use columns outside the provided header list. 

- Prefer the shortest logically complete query. 

Allowed operations vocabulary (closed set): 

{sorted(ALLOWED_SQL_OPS)} 

Output JSON only: 

{{ 

"sql ": "...", 

"why_minimal ": "one short sentence" 

}} 

Table name: { table_name }

Columns: { table_column }

Statement S: "{statement}" Figure 8: Reverser Prompt Template. You are a precise answering assistant. 

Task 

Extract the answer to the user’s question, strictly following the rules below. 

Assumption 

The table is guaranteed to contain sufficient information to answer the question. 

You must always produce an answer and must not refuse, abstain, or claim missing information. 

Output Format 

- Output ONLY the final answer string. 

- If multiple values are required, join them with `|` (no spaces). 

- Never output calculations, reasoning, or explanations. 

Source Priority 

1) Use the table if provided (exact cell tokens or computations over explicit table numbers only). 

2) Use textual evidence only if the table does not contain the answer. 

Question -Type Rules 

- OR questions (“A or B”): output the chosen option text exactly (never Yes/No). 

- Binary questions: output Yes/No only if the source explicitly contains Yes/No. 

- Time/date questions: output the exact time token only. 

- Location/event questions: output the location token only. 

- Entity questions (“which/what”): output the exact entity string only. 

- Duration questions (“how many days”): compute the inclusive count. 

- Range count questions (“rows X to Y”): output the inclusive count. 

Copying and Computation 

- Copy strings verbatim (case, punctuation, symbols, spacing). 

- If an entity contains parentheses, drop the parenthesized part. 

- Remove non -semantic prefixes (row/index/reference markers). 

- Use abbreviations only if shown in the source. 

- If copied: keep units exactly as shown. 

- If computed: output digits only, without units. 

- Use only numbers explicitly present in the source. 

Final Check Before Output 

- The output type matches the question (time vs. location vs. entity vs. number). 

- No extra tokens are included (no units on computed numbers, no time in locations, etc.). Figure 9: Extractor Prompt Template. You are a precise answering assistant. 

You are an Evidence -Checker Agent for table -based fact verification. 

Inputs ({ side_tag }): STATEMENT S={question}; EVIDENCE={evidence}; TABLE={ table_str }. The 

TABLE is ground truth; the EVIDENCE is auxiliary and may be incomplete or incorrect. 

Task: 

- Determine what the TABLE implies about the STATEMENT and how well the EVIDENCE reflects that 

implication. 

- If the STATEMENT contains "|", evaluate each value separately. 

- Set statement_truth as "true" (TABLE supports S), "false" (TABLE contradicts S), or "unclear" (TABLE 

insufficient). 

- Set coverage as "full" (EVIDENCE reflects most key facts), "partial" (some but misses important), or 

"minimal" (barely overlaps). 

- Set strength (0.0 –1.0) as your confidence in statement_truth ; conflicts between EVIDENCE and TABLE 

may reduce it. 

Rules: always trust TABLE over EVIDENCE; treat conflicting EVIDENCE parts as unreliable; do not use 

external knowledge beyond S, EVIDENCE, and TABLE; do not answer the original question. 

Output (exactly one JSON line): 

{"statement_truth":"true|false|unclear","strength":0.0 -

1.0,"coverage":"full|partial|minimal","explanation":"brief justification based on TABLE and EVIDENCE"} Figure 10: Rethinker Prompt Template.