Title: Seeing the Forest for the Trees: The Gaussian Process Limit of BART

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.28844v1

Published Time: Mon, 03 Aug 2026 00:12:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 55

Markdown Content:
# Seeing the Forest for the Trees: The Gaussian Process Limit of BART 

Cory McCartan ∗

Department of Statistics Pennsylvania State University 

Melody Huang 

Department of Political Science Department of Statistics & Data Science Yale University July 30, 2026 

Abstract 

Bayesian Additive Regression Trees (BART) have shown state-of-the-art performance in both prediction and causal inference problems. Previous theoretical work has attempted to explain BART’s superior performance by establishing posterior contraction rates for standard BART models, but these rates depend strongly on the number of covariates. Here, we take a different approach and study the behavior of BART as the number of trees grows towards infinity. We show that in this regime, BART converges to a Gaussian process (GP) with a particular kernel. The kernel and its corresponding reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) have favorable inferential properties that help explain BART’s excellent performance. We introduce random tree features 

as an approximation to this limiting GP, and establish minimax-optimal learning rates for ridge regression on these random features that depend only logarithmically on dimension. In addition to providing insight into the empirical success of BART, random tree features offer a computational benefit over traditional MCMC estimation. The random-features approximation also allows practitioners to easily incorporate BART into any model which has a linear predictor, expanding the applicability and flexibility of BART. 

Keywords BART • Gaussian process • random features 

> ∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: mccartan@psu.edu . Website: https://corymccartan.com/. Address: 326 Thomas Building, University Park, PA 16802. The authors thank Bharath K. Sriperumbudur for helpful comments. 

1arXiv:2607.28844v1 [math.ST] 30 Jul 2026 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

## 1 Introduction 

Bayesian Additive Regression Trees (BART, Chipman et al., 2007, 2010) is a nonparametric Bayesian regression model that is often considered the Bayesian analogue of boosted trees. BART models the regression function as a sum of many decision trees, which are constrained to be small by the prior on each tree. BART has demonstrated strong empirical performance across both prediction and causal inference tasks, often outperforming alternative approaches such as random forests and gradient boosting, and is widely applied across the social and biomedical sciences (Linero, 2017; Hill et al., 2020; Dorie et al., 2019). BART’s practical success has spurred theoretical investigations into its asymptotic properties. While posterior contraction rates have been established for BART and its variants under a variety of function classes (see, e.g., Ročková and Saha, 2019), they suggest but do not isolate a specific aspect of the BART model that is responsible for its superior performance. Most authors agree that the additive structure of the BART model is critical to its success (Chipman et al., 2010; Ročková and van der Pas, 2020; Linero and Yang, 2018) but beyond that, it is less clear which of the many pieces of the model matter most. Is it the Bayesian inferential framework, the model’s ability to adapt the tree structure, the flexible nature of the trees themselves, or something else? We show that none of these latter three explanations are empirically supported. Instead, we argue that BART is most usefully viewed as a random-feature approximation to a limiting Gaussian process. This perspective provides theoretical, explanatory, computational, and practical benefits for working with BART. 

1.1 Contributions 

We first investigate the load-bearing components of the BART model through a simple ablation study, presented briefly in Section 2.3 and in more detail in Section 5.1. By removing aspects of the model, we show that Bayesian learning of the tree structure, and even aspects of the tree structure itself, do not appear to drive the bulk of BART’s performance, so long as the number of trees is sufficiently large. This motivates a theoretical investigation into the large-tree limit of BART. In Section 3, we establish that a symmetric-tree BART prior converges weakly to a Gaussian process (GP) in the infinite-tree limit, and derive a series expression for the covariance function and a closed-form special case. While the GP limit has been conjectured (Linero, 2017) and the finite-dimensional covariance derived in the asymmetric case (Petrillo, 2024), we are, to our knowledge, the first to formally state and prove the weak convergence result. We investigate the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) corresponding to the limiting GP and show that it is equivalent to 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ), the Sobolev space with dominating mixed derivatives. As we discuss in Section 3.3, this space can be interpreted as the set of functions that are additively decomposable as 𝑝 -way interactions of univariate functions. This result helps explain the performance of BART, because the minimax rate for regression in 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) depends on the covariate dimension 𝑝 

only logarithmically. Of course, these results only apply with infinitely many trees. In Section 4, we study the behavior of a random-feature approximation to the limiting GP. Practically, this means a ridge regression on 

random tree features drawn from the prior, without any adaptation. We show that, under appropriate regularity conditions, as few as 𝑇 𝑛 ≍ 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )1+2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 trees can be sufficient to achieve an error rate of 𝑛 −1/3 log (𝑛 ) (𝑝 −1)/ 3, which is minimax-optimal for regression in 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) (Lin, 2000). The 2The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

error rate is particularly notable as it is faster than 𝑛 −1/4 for any 𝑝 , and relies only on weak smoothness assumptions on the underlying function. This allows regression on random tree features to be used within modern debiased machine learning estimators, which require a rate faster than 𝑛 −1/4 for nuisance function estimation (Chernozhukov et al., 2018). The result has immediate computational implications as well: rather than carry out relatively expensive MCMC sampling for a BART model, a single ridge regression on sufficiently many completely random tree features can provide optimal inferential rates. Even when computation is not a bottleneck, the random basis expansion perspective allows practitioners to achieve BART-like performance in a much wider variety of models, simply by including the random tree features as part of any linear predictor. This is a marked improvement over current practice, which requires experts to write custom MCMC samplers that may suffer from poor mixing, especially in non-Gaussian settings where data augmentation can be required (Sparapani et al., 2016; Murray, 2021; Deshpande et al., 2026). We conclude in Section 5 with a real-data evaluation of the predictive performance of random tree features compared to full BART, boosted trees, and random forests. We also compare the uncertainty quantification of random tree features to full BART as well as the limiting GP, and find strong similarities between random features and full BART. 

1.2 Related Work 

This paper connects to three distinct branches of existing work: (1) prior theoretical work on BART’s performance, (2) nonparametric methods that target functions in spaces like 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ), and (3) random feature approximations to Gaussian processes and kernel methods. Existing BART literature has established different contraction rates for BART for a variety of different function classes. For example, Van der Pas and Ročková (2017) proves near-minimax rates for step mean functions in Gaussian regression; Ročková and Saha (2019) and Ročková and van der Pas (2020) provide rates for Hölder continuous functions. These results all suffer from the curse of dimensionality. More specifically, the rates generally all boil down to the typical nonparametric rate 𝑛 −𝛼 /( 2𝛼 +𝑝 ) for 𝑝 

covariates and a smoothness parameter 𝛼 . Follow-up work has tackled this challenge through new proof techniques as well as modifications to the BART prior, leading to results in more esoteric function spaces that are anisotropic or sparse (Jeong and Rockova, 2023; Yee et al., 2024; Ročková and van der Pas, 2020; Linero, 2018; Linero and Yang, 2018). By and large, these results alter the basic rate by letting 𝑝 refer to the effective number of covariates, either across the entire function or after decomposing into a small number of additive components. While these results shed light on BART’s adaptability, the curse of dimensionality remains: even a moderate number of effective covariates still leads to a slow rate. With 𝛼 < 1 (as is often required), an effective 𝑝 ≥ 3 leads to a rate slower than 

> 𝑛 −1/4

.All of these papers focus on the 𝑛 → ∞ limit, with 𝑇 fixed (or drawn from a fixed prior). Instead, we focus on the 𝑇 → ∞ limit, which leads to a different theoretical approach. Growing 𝑇 with 𝑛 preserves the “many small trees” intuition that motivated BART (Chipman et al., 2010). The resulting learning rates, which unlike existing rates do not depend as strongly on the covariate dimension, highlight the importance of this intuition. A different recent strand of literature, which initially appears to be far distant from BART, develops regression methods with a large basis expansion consisting of interactions of step functions. The proposed approaches obtain learning rates similar to the ones we find here, for similar or identical function classes. This includes the highly adaptive lasso (HAL, Benkeser and Van der Laan, 2016; Van 3The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

der Laan, 2023), highly adaptive ridge (HAR, Schuler et al., 2024), and lassoed tree boosting (LTB, Schuler et al., 2022). The basis features in these approaches are of an identical form to the ones studied here under a symmetric-tree BART model. The key difference is that HAL and HAR use all possible interactions of all features. Instead, we use a random set of such features, with priority to low-dimensional interactions. One interpretation of our main random-feature result here is as showing that a randomized version of HAR can perform just as well asymptotically, while avoiding HAR’s 𝑂 (𝑛 3) computational cost. The developers of HAL, HAR, and LTB operate within slightly different function classes, those defined by properties of their sectional derivatives, but as they explain, their classes are similar or identical to  

> 𝑆 1([

0, 1]𝑝 ) under certain assumptions. Other authors, most notably Zhang and Simon (2023), have studied regression in 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) directly. Zhang and Simon (2023) develop a deterministic sieve basis expansion based on reordered tensor products of continuous basis functions of univariate Sobolev spaces. While not identical, the pattern of features in their sieve is similar to the random tree features developed here, as they primarily consists of interactions of simple nonlinear functions of a few covariates. The sieve perspective naturally leads to questions about a more deterministic way of selecting random tree features from the prior, which may pay dividends theoretically and practically. Finally, our use of random tree features builds directly on prior work on random feature approxima-tions to Gaussian processes, a framework first introduced by Rahimi and Recht (2007). Most of the theoretical work has focused on random Fourier features, which are slightly simpler to analyze than the multivariate and discontinuous random features studied here. We build particularly on the results of Rudi and Rosasco (2017), generalizing some of their key results to handle these complications. More applied literature has directly proposed random features not dissimilar from the random trees here, including ‘random binning features’ proposed by Rahimi and Recht (2007) and the Mondrian kernel studied by Balog et al. (2016). Very recently, Linero et al. (2026) proposed random tree features as a way of approximating a BART-based kernel mean embedding. However, none of these papers formally established weak convergence to a GP, nor learning rates comparable to those developed here. 

## 2 Setup 

We focus on the setting of estimating a regression function 𝑔 (x) on predictors x lying in the unit hypercube [0, 1]𝑝 . This section introduces the BART model for 𝑔 and establishes our notation. Once the BART model is defined, we empirically investigate the performance of its components through an ablation study, which motivates our theoretical investigations in the rest of the paper. Let 1{·} be an indicator function for the event {·} . By [𝑝 ] for 𝑝 ∈ ℕ we mean the set {1, . . . , 𝑝 }. We denote weak convergence by ⇒. The notation 𝑎 ≲ 𝑏 means that 𝑎 ≤ 𝐶 · 𝑏 for a universal constant 𝐶 ;   

> 𝑎 ≍𝑏

means 𝑎 ≲ 𝑏 and 𝑏 ≲ 𝑎 , or equivalently 𝐶 ≤ 𝑎 /𝑏 ≤ 𝐶 ′ for universal constants 𝐶, 𝐶 ′.

2.1 Decision trees 

A decision tree is a random function of x ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 defined by a partition of [0, 1]𝑝 into 𝐿 hyperrectan-gular regions or blocks of the form [𝑎 1, 𝑏 1) × · · · × [ 𝑎 𝑝 , 𝑏 𝑝 ), where each [𝑎 𝑗 , 𝑏 𝑗 ) ⊆ [ 0, 1], and the right endpoint is closed if 𝑏 𝑗 = 1.We index blocks by binary words l ∈ L ⊆ {− 1, 1}𝐷 , where 𝐷 is the depth of the tree: the number of binary decisions that define membership in the block indexed by l. In general we have 𝐷 +1 ≤ |L| ≤ 2𝐷 .We denote by 𝜓 l (x) the indicator variable that x is in region indexed by l.4The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Each block is associated with a leaf parameter 𝜇 l ∈ ℝ. The tree function itself is constant within each block, and so can be represented as a linear combination: 

ℎ(x) =∑︁ 

> l∈ L

𝜇 l𝜓 l (x). (1) A symmetric decision tree is a special case where L = {− 1, 1}𝐷 and the blocks take a certain structure, defined by a tuple of 𝐷 decision rules, each consisting of a variable 𝑉 ∈ [ 𝑝 ]𝐷 and a cutpoint or split value 𝑆 ∈ [ 0, 1]. In a symmetric tree, the order in which the decision rules are applied is arbitrary. Together, the rules map the input x to one of 2𝐷 regions, which we can represent as 

𝜓 l (x; 𝐷, V, S) :=

> 𝐷

Ö

> 𝑘 =1

1{𝑙 𝑘 𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 <𝑙 𝑘 𝑙 𝑘 𝑆 𝑘 }.

By <𝑙 𝑘 we mean < if 𝑙 𝑘 = 1 and ≤ if 𝑙 𝑘 = −1, so that each x is mapped to exactly one leaf. 

2.2 BART 

A BART function with 𝑇 trees is defined by 

𝑔 𝑇 (x) := 𝑇 −1/2

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

ℎ𝑗 (x) = 𝑇 −1/2

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

∑︁ l∈ L 

𝜇 𝑗 l𝜓 𝑗 l (x) = 𝑇 −1/2

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

Ψ𝑗 (x)⊤ 𝝁 𝑗 ,

where Ψ𝑗 = (𝜓 𝑗 l)l∈ L denotes the vector of indicator functions. We draw the parameters of each ℎ𝑗 i.i.d. from the following generic prior: 

Ψ𝑗 ∼ 𝑓 Ψ and 𝜇 𝑗 l | 𝐷 𝑗 iid 

∼ N ( 0, 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

).

In general BART models, the tree structure prior 𝑓 Ψ is defined by a branching process. For symmetric trees, we can factor this prior into pieces specific to 𝐷 , V, and S.

𝐷 𝑗 ∼ 𝑓 𝐷 , 𝑉 𝑗𝑘 | 𝐷 𝑗 iid 

∼ 𝑓 𝑉 , and 𝑆 𝑗𝑘 | 𝐷 𝑗 iid 

∼ 𝑓 𝑆 .

Here 𝑓 𝐷 , 𝑓 𝑉 , and 𝑓 𝑆 are generic density functions, with 𝑓 𝐷 supported on the positive integers, 𝑓 𝑉 supported on [𝑝 ] with 𝑓 𝑉 (𝑣 ) > 0 everywhere, and 𝑓 𝑆 continuous and supported on [0, 1] with strictly positive density everywhere. Often, a BART function is used directly as the model for a conditional expectation function (CEF) 𝔼 [𝑌 | x, 𝑔 𝑇 ] = 𝑔 𝑇 (x), as we do here, but BART functions can be used within other parts of a model as well. 

2.3 Motivating ablation study 

In fitting a BART model, both the tree structure encoded by (𝐷 𝑗 , V𝑗 , S𝑗 )𝑇 𝑗 =1 and the leaf parameters 

(𝝁 𝑗 )𝑇 𝑗 =1 are learned from the data. It is natural to ask which of these parameters are most important for explaining BART’s empirical success, or whether both are equally important. Two other parts of the BART model are found universally in BART applications, but each impose a nontrivial computational cost: the use of Bayesian inference for the parameters, and the use of fully general trees versus symmetric trees. It is likewise natural to wonder whether these parts of the model are strictly necessary for BART’s performance. 5The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

We investigate these three aspects of the BART model through a simple ablation study. In this section, we provide the results for a single dataset, with comprehensive results for a battery of datasets in Section 5.1. We consider the abalone dataset, which contains the age of 4,177 abalone and 8 predictors such as sex, diameter, and shell weight (Nash et al., 1994). For each part of the model, we compare the predictive performance of the full BART model, as measured with out-of-sample 𝑅 2, to a version of the model with different parts removed, in the ways we describe below. Figure 1 plots the difference in 𝑅 2 for each of these experiments as the number of trees 𝑇 varies. First, to measure the impact of Bayesian inference, we compute the posterior conditional on the tree structure at the final MCMC iteration, and compare its performance to the full posterior mean. As panel (a) shows, using a single sampled tree structure incurs only a small loss in predictive performance, which appears relatively constant across the number of trees. Second, to measure the impact of learning the tree structure, we compare the posterior conditional on the tree structure at the final MCMC iteration to that from the initial MCMC iteration. To the extent that the posterior exhibits adaptation to the tree structure, we would expect a large gap in performance between these two samples. While this gap is evident for small 𝑇 in panel (b), it narrows as 𝑇 increases, and is relatively small at 𝑇 = 500 for these data. Finally, to measure the impact of asymmetric trees, we build a symmetrized version of the final-iteration tree structure and compare posteriors conditional on the asymmetric and symmetric trees. To symmetrize, we replace all nodes at each level of a tree with a single node chosen uniformly from all the nodes at that level. We randomly terminate this process with a certain probability at each depth, set so that the expected number of nodes in the symmetrized tree matches the number of nodes in the original tree. This ensures that the symmetrized tree is no more expressive than the original tree, on average. As panel (c) shows, the impact of using symmetrized trees is nearly zero as long as 𝑇 is not very small. If anything, this figure overstates the performance of asymmetric trees, since the original MCMC did not sample with symmetric trees in mind. Taken together, these experiments suggest that once 𝑇 is large, none of Bayesian averaging, tree structure learning, or asymmetric trees is critical to BART’s performance. The additive combination of many small interacted step functions appears to be the key ingredient, at least asymptotically. This motivates our investigation into the 𝑇 → ∞ limit of BART, and allows us to focus on symmetric trees, which are computationally more efficient and theoretically simpler to study. 

## 3 BART converges to a Gaussian process 

In this section, we investigate the distribution of 𝑔 𝑇 as a random function, and its limiting behavior as 𝑇 → ∞ . We establish that 𝑔 𝑇 ⇒ GP (0, 𝑘 BART ) for a certain kernel 𝑘 BART and on a suitably defined function space. First, we derive the covariance function of 𝑔 𝑇 , which in turn yields convergence of the finite-dimensional distributions of 𝑔 𝑇 . We then turn to the weak convergence of 𝑔 𝑇 itself. 

3.1 Covariance function 

From the definition of the BART model, for any fixed x, 

> 𝑔 𝑇 (

x) | { Ψ𝑗 }𝑇 𝑗 =1 ∼ N ( 0, 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇 ),

since exactly one 𝜇 𝑗 l contributes for each 𝑗 , and each is independently drawn with variance 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

. With finitely many trees, 𝑔 𝑇 (x) and 𝑔 𝑇 (x′) are not jointly Gaussian for x ≠ x′; however, we can derive their 6The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 ← Final worse    

> −0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0
> 575 200 500
> Difference in  R2

(a) Final iteration minus all iterations (Bayes)    

> ← Initial worse
> 575 200 500

(b) Initial iteration minus final iteration    

> ← Symmetrized worse
> Not significant
> 575 200 500

Number of trees 

(c) Symmetrized minus original, final iteration 

Figure 1: Three ablation studies on abalone data (𝑛 = 4 177 , 𝑝 = 8). Each panel compares out-of-sample 𝑅 2 values of the posterior mean, for two different regression fits and different numbers of regression trees. The average difference in 𝑅 2 across 20 cross validation splits and multiple replicates is plotted along with 95% confidence intervals. (a) Ablating Bayes: 𝑅 2 for the full posterior mean versus the posterior mean conditioned on the tree structure at the final MCMC iteration. (b) Ablating tree learning: 𝑅 2 conditioned on the final-iteration trees versus the initial-iteration trees. 

(c) Ablating asymmetric trees: 𝑅 2 conditioned on the final-iteration trees versus a symmetrized version of those same trees. 

covariance. We do so in two steps: first, showing that the covariance function of a single tree, i.e., between ℎ(x) and ℎ(x′), is proportional to the probability of x and x′ being in the same leaf node, and second, computing that probability for symmetric trees specifically. 

Proposition 3.1. For a tree ℎ drawn from its prior, and any fixed x, x′ ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 ,

Cov [ℎ(x), ℎ (x′)] = 𝑘 BART (x, x′) := 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

ℙ[x ∼ℎ x′],

where x ∼ℎ x′ is the event that x and x′ are in the same leaf node in ℎ.

We now turn to characterizing ℙ[x ∼ℎ x′] for symmetric trees. To do so, define the symmetric BART covariate metric as 

𝑑 BART (x, x′) :=

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> 𝑣 =1

𝑓 𝑉 (𝑣 ) · 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑣 ) − 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 ′

> 𝑣

) .𝑑 BART is clearly symmetric. Furthermore, because 𝑓 𝑆 has strictly positive density, 𝐹 𝑆 is strictly increasing and so 𝑑 BART also satisfies positivity. The triangle inequality follows from the triangle inequality for absolute values. As a result, 𝑑 BART is indeed a metric. When 𝑓 𝑉 is uniform on [𝑝 ], and 𝑓 𝑆 is uniform on [0, 1], then 

𝑑 BART (x, x′) = 𝑝 −1 ∥x − x′ ∥1.

Because of the rescaling, 𝑑 BART ( · , · ) ≤ 1. We can then express ℙ[x ∼ℎ x′] as a series involving 𝑑 BART 

and the distribution of tree depths 𝑓 𝐷 .7The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 D ~ P o i s ( 1 . 2 5 ) | D > 0    

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> x
> kBART (x, 0)
> Depth
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 40.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.5 1.0 k BART (x, (0.5, 0.5) )

Figure 2: Visualization of 𝑘 BART . The left panel shows 𝑘 BART (· , 0) for different choices of the depth prior 𝑓 𝐷 . The colored lines correspond to 𝑓 𝐷 that place all mass on a single depth, while the black dashed line corresponds to the Poisson 𝑓 𝐷 in Corollary 3.1, with 𝑟 = 1.25 chosen to match the mean depth of the traditional BART prior. The right panel shows 𝑘 BART (· , (0.5, 0.5)) on the unit square, using the same calibrated Poisson 𝑓 𝐷 .

Proposition 3.2. For a tree ℎ drawn from the symmetric BART tree prior, and any fixed x, x′ ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 ,

ℙ[x ∼ℎ x′] =

> ∞

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

(1 − 𝑑 BART (x, x′)) 𝑘 𝑓 𝐷 (𝑘 ).

Certain choices of 𝑓 𝐷 yield even simpler closed-form expressions for 𝑘 BART in symmetric trees. For example, if all trees have depth 1 such that 𝑓 𝐷 (1) = 1 and 𝑓 𝐷 (𝑘 ) = 0 for all 𝑘 > 1, then 𝑘 BART (x, x′) =

1 − 𝑑 BART (x, x′). This example, as well as the cases of all trees having depths 2, 3, or 4, are visualized in the left panel of Figure 2. A more interesting case is the following result. 

Corollary 3.1. Let 𝑊 ∼ Pois (𝑟 ). If 𝐷 ∼ ( 𝑊 | 𝑊 > 0), then 

𝑘 BART (x, x′) = 𝜎 2

> 𝜇

1 − 𝑒 −𝑟 (exp (− 𝑟 𝑑 BART (x, x′)) − 𝑒 −𝑟 ) .

The rescaling and shifting according to −𝑒 −𝑟 differentiates 𝑘 BART in this case from the form of the 

ℓ1-Laplacian kernel and ensures that when 𝑑 BART (x, x′) = 1 (i.e., its maximum), the covariance is zero, and when 𝑑 BART (x, x′) = 0, the covariance is 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

.This formulation makes clear the role of average depth in determining the covariance structure. Larger 

𝑟 produces deeper trees and also shrinks the length scale of the prior. The right panel of Figure 2 visualizes 𝑘 BART with this choice of 𝑓 𝐷 on the unit square, with 𝑟 chosen by moment-matching the mean tree depth to the traditional BART prior of Chipman et al. (2007). The visible ridge along 

𝑥 1 = 0.5 and 𝑥 2 = 0.5 clearly demonstrates the anisotropic nature of 𝑘 BART , a key difference from standard isotropic kernels like the squared-exponential or Matérn. 8The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

3.2 Convergence result 

Having derived the form of the covariance function for tree functions, we can apply the central limit theorem to derive the (finite-dimensional) distributional limit of a BART function. 

Lemma 3.1. For any fixed x1, . . . , x𝑘 ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 , as 𝑇 → ∞ , 

> (𝑔 𝑇 (

x1), . . . , 𝑔 𝑇 (x𝑘 )) ⇒ N ( 0, 𝐾 ),

where 𝐾 𝑖𝑗 := 𝑘 BART (x𝑖 , x𝑗 ).

Thus any finite collection of points behaves like a Gaussian process under 𝑔 𝑇 , as 𝑇 → ∞ . Showing that 𝑔 𝑇 itself converges weakly to a Gaussian process requires additional work, and also depends on a chosen function space on which the limit will be defined. Following Neuhaus (1971) and Bickel and Wichura (1971), we generalize the notion of càdlàg functions to real-valued functions on [0, 1]𝑝 . To do so, notice that every point z ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 defines a partition 

> B(

z) of that space into 2𝑝 blocks. For example, when 𝑝 = 3, [0, 𝑧 1) × [ 𝑧 2, 1] × [ 0, 𝑧 3) is one such block. We define the function space D𝑝 as the set of functions 𝑓 : [0, 1]𝑝 → ℝ such that for every x ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 ,every nonempty block 𝐵 ∈ B( x), and every sequence x𝑛 ∈ 𝐵 with x𝑛 → x,(1) the sequence 𝑓 (x𝑛 ) converges; and (2) if x ∈ 𝐵 , then 𝑓 (x𝑛 ) → 𝑓 (x).The point x is only in one of the blocks, so these conditions encode the idea of “continuity from above, with limits from below.” It is possible to define a metric topology on D𝑝 so the space is Polish, and such that when 𝑝 = 1 we recover the Skorohod function space of càdlàg functions on [0, 1] (Bickel and Wichura, 1971). As a result, Prokhorov’s theorem applies, which means that the tightness of the sequence (𝑔 𝑇 )∞ 

> 𝑇 =1

is sufficient to establish weak convergence, along with the convergence of finite-dimensional distributions, which was shown in Lemma 3.1. See Neuhaus (1971) for more discussion, and Kern (2024) for a review of topologies in Skorohod spaces. To show tightness of a random function sequence, the general approach is to rely on the Arzelà–Ascoli theorem, which establishes that uniform boundedness and uniform equicontinuity of the sequence are sufficient for tightness. However, Arzelà–Ascoli applies to sequences of continuous functions, while the 𝑔 𝑇 are discontinuous. We instead adapt an argument developed by Bickel and Wichura (1971) to show convergence of sequences of random functions on D𝑝 , i.e., D𝑝 -valued stochastic processes. We now state our convergence result along with a short sketch of our proof. The full proof is contained in the appendix. 

Theorem 3.1. Let {𝑔 𝑇 }∞ 

> 𝑇 =1

be a sequence of symmetric BART functions on [0, 1]𝑝 . If 𝐹 𝑆 is Lipschitz continuous and 𝔼 [𝐷 2𝑝 ] < ∞, then as 𝑇 → ∞ , 𝑔 𝑇 ⇒ GP (0, 𝑘 BART ) on D𝑝 .Proof Sketch. Given Lemma 3.1, we must show that the sequence (𝑔 𝑇 )∞ 

> 𝑇 =1

is tight in D𝑝 . To do so, we first prove a modified version of a key result from Bickel and Wichura (1971), which establishes that if a stochastic process belongs to a specific class, then the sequence is tight in D𝑝 . We then prove that 𝑔 𝑇 

belongs to this class of functions, allowing us to establish weak convergence in the infinite-tree limit. More specifically, the corollary to Bickel and Wichura (1971) Theorem 2 provides sufficient conditions for tightness to hold. The main condition is that a certain modulus of continuity, defined essentially to ignore a finite number of discontinuities, converge uniformly to zero. This modulus contains a supremum over all pairs of points in the unit hypercube. Their theorem 3 replaces this supremum with 9The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

another that is only over adjacent triplets of points, as long as the sequence of stochastic processes belongs to a class C( 𝛽, 𝛾 ). Informally, the class C( 𝛽, 𝛾 ) constrains the fluctuations in the stochastic process for a given measure across adjacent blocks. 𝛽 controls the decay in block size, while 𝛾 controls the deviations in the stochastic process. The advantage of working with C( 𝛽, 𝛾 ) is that membership can be established via a moment bound on elements in the sequence, which is easier to work with. Unfortunately, a key requirement in Bickel and Wichura (1971) is that the stochastic processes “vanish on the lower boundary,” i.e., are fixed at zero whenever any coordinate is zero. In our specific case, 𝑔 𝑇 

is not fixed at zero whenever a coordinate is zero. Furthermore, the original moment bound is not satisfied by 𝑔 𝑇 for finite 𝑇 . As a result, we cannot directly apply their results. We develop an alternative 𝑇 -dependent class of functions C𝑇 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 , ℝ) that is analogous to C( 2, 4) of Bickel and Wichura, but does not require vanishing on the lower boundary. Helpfully, our alternative class C𝑇 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 , ℝ) allows for relaxations of the moment bound. We then prove a version of their Theorem 1 for C𝑇 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 , ℝ) using a similar approach via induction on 𝑝 (i.e., Lemma A.6), which allows us to establish an analogous result to their Theorem 3. It remains to show that in fact 𝑔 𝑇 ∈ C 𝑇 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 , ℝ) for all 𝑇 , i.e., that the moment bound is satisfied. We establish the bound in Lemma A.5, relying on a preceding series of technical lemmas. The bound relies on controlling the probability that the vertices of a block in [0, 1]𝑝 end up in different leaf nodes of a random tree. If any pair of vertices are in the same leaf node, then the key function increment whose moment we must control is zero, and so the probability of all vertices being in different leaf nodes critically controls our upper bound. It is here that the key features of the BART model, and the assumptions of the theorem, are used. The negative association of the split locations conditional on 𝐷 

helps factor joint probabilities over 𝑝 dimensions into a product over each dimension, and Lipschitz continuity of 𝐹 𝑆 allows us to bound these probabilities by the side lengths of the block. The finite 2𝑝 -th moment of 𝐷 ensures that there are not too many splits, which would otherwise make the probability of all vertices being in different leaf nodes too large. □

The conditions needed for convergence are relatively weak and encompass the BART priors used in practice, in which 𝐷 is light-tailed and 𝑆 is uniform. 

3.3 Corresponding kernel and RKHS 

Having shown that the BART model converges to a GP, we now investigate the properties of the kernel  

> 𝑘 BART

and its corresponding reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) HBART , which characterize the properties of GP samples and the optimal learning rates for function estimation from such GPs. The formal result is stated in Proposition 3.3 below, but we first introduce the relevant function spaces and explain their relationships. When 𝑝 = 1, Proposition 3.3 implies that 𝑘 BART is equivalent to the Laplacian kernel, and the RKHS  

> HBART

is norm-equivalent to the Sobolev space  

> 𝑊 1([

0, 1]) := 𝑓 ∈ 𝐿 2 ([ 0, 1]) : 𝐷𝑓 exists and 𝐷𝑓 ∈ 𝐿 2 ([ 0, 1]) ,

where 𝐷𝑓 is the weak derivative of 𝑓 (see, e.g., Kanagawa et al., 2018). When 𝑝 > 1, 𝑘 BART is a product kernel, and Proposition 3.3 establishes that the corresponding RKHS is norm-equivalent to a tensor product of Sobolev spaces, which can be characterized analogously to 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]) as  

> 𝑆 1([

0, 1]𝑝 ) := 

> 𝑝 Ì
> 𝑣 =1
> 𝑊 1([

0, 1]) = 𝑓 ∈ 𝐿 2 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) : 𝐷 a𝑓 ∈ 𝐿 2 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) for all ∥a∥∞ ≤ 1 .

10 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

where 𝐷 a is the weak partial derivative of 𝑓 along the variables indexed by a; for example, if 𝑝 = 2

then 𝐷 (1,1) 𝑓 is the (weak) mixed partial derivative of 𝑓 . This space is also referred to as a Sobolev space with dominating mixed derivatives. We can now state the result. 

Proposition 3.3. Suppose ℙ(𝐷 ≥ 𝑝 ) > 0 and 𝔼 [𝐷 𝑝 ] < ∞, and 𝐹 𝑆 is Lipschitz continuous. Then there exist constants 0 < 𝑐 < 𝐶 < ∞ such that 

𝑐𝐾 ⊗ ⪯ 𝑘 BART ⪯ 𝐶𝐾 ⊗ ,

where 𝐾 ⊗ (u, u′) := Î𝑝 𝑣 =1 exp  − 𝑢 𝑣 − 𝑢 ′

> 𝑣

 is the ℓ1-Laplacian kernel on [0, 1]𝑝 . Consequently, the RKHS 

HBART corresponding to 𝑘 BART is norm-equivalent to the tensor product Sobolev space 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ).

Intuitively, the moment requirement on 𝐷 ensures that the trees are not too deep, which would lead to functions that are too flexible; a stronger moment requirement is needed for GP convergence. The requirement that ℙ(𝐷 ≥ 𝑝 ) > 0 ensures that trees exist that can capture 𝑝 -way interactions, which is necessary for the RKHS to contain all functions in 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ).We will say that a symmetric BART prior is regular if it satisfies the prior conditions of Proposition 3.3. Usefully, the Poisson-distributed 𝐷 of Corollary 3.1 is regular for all 𝑝 , as is the standard BART depth prior introduced by Chipman et al. (2010). Note that regularity is slightly weaker than the conditions required for Theorem 3.1 above, which rely on more finite moments of 𝐷 .It is also instructive to compare the definition of 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) to that of the 𝑝 -dimensional first-order Sobolev space 

𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) := 𝑓 ∈ 𝐿 2 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) : 𝐷 a𝑓 ∈ 𝐿 2 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) for all ∥a∥1 ≤ 1 .𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) is a strictly smaller space than 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ), since it requires more (weak) mixed partial derivatives to exist. However, as Zhang and Simon (2023) discuss, 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) is a strictly larger space than the order-𝑝 Sobolev space 𝑊 𝑝 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ), which requires 𝑝 derivatives to exist. Those authors also give the following equivalent characterization of 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) as the closure of the set 

(

𝑓 =

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑚 =1
> 𝑝

Ö

> 𝑘 =1

𝑓 𝑚𝑘 : 𝑁 < ∞, 𝑓 𝑚𝑘 ∈ 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]) 

)

with respect to a certain norm. Thus HBART can also be thought of as the space of functions which are additively decomposable into 𝑝 -way interactions of univariate functions in 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]) —not dissimilar to symmetric BART functions. 1

The more restrictive nature of the space 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) versus 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) translates to improved rates of function estimation, as we discuss in the next section. 

## 4 BART as a Random Feature Approximation 

As discussed in the preceding section, the RKHS HBART corresponding to the BART kernel has attractive properties as a hypothesis class for function estimation: functions in HBART decompose additively into 𝑝 -way interactions of univariate functions. However, the limiting Gaussian process requires infinitely many trees. In practice, BART models use a finite number of trees. This section investigates the behavior of BART models with a finite number of random tree features , i.e. models    

> 1Of course, the component leaf functions in BART do not belong to 𝑊 1([ 0,1]) .

11 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

whose trees are drawn i.i.d. from the BART prior and not treated as parameters, as in standard BART models. We establish learning rates for these models, which both help explain BART’s theoretical performance and motivate random tree features as a practical approximation to full BART modeling in their own right. Usefully, our rates show that under mild regularity conditions, as few as 𝑇 𝑛 ≍

𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )1+2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 trees are sufficient to achieve a minimax-optimal rate for regression in 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ).This rate avoids the curse of dimensionality and is faster than 𝑛 −1/4 for any 𝑝 .We consider a standard nonparametric regression setup. Assume (𝑋 𝑖 , 𝑌 𝑖 )𝑛 𝑖 =1

> iid

∼ ℙ; then we can write 

𝑌 = 𝑔 0 (x) + 𝜖, 

for the conditional expectation function (CEF) 𝑔 0 (x) := 𝔼 [𝑌 | 𝑋 = x] and a mean-zero error term 𝜖 .Throughout, we impose two regularity conditions on ℙ:(1) 𝑋 has density 𝜌 with respect to Lebesgue measure which is bounded above and below: 0 < 𝜌 − ≤

𝜌 (𝑥 ) ≤ 𝜌 + < ∞.(2) The noise is sub-exponential: there exist 𝜎 2, 𝐵 < ∞ with 𝔼 [| 𝑌 |𝑐 | 𝑋 ] ≤ 12 𝑐 !𝜎 2 𝐵 𝑐 −2 for all 𝑐 ≥ 2.The main modeling assumption we make is that 𝑔 0 ∈ H BART . More precisely, we assume that the conditional expectation function admits a version that belongs to HBART with ∥𝑔 0 ∥HBART ≤ 𝑅 for some constant 𝑅 < ∞. Our results below do not require a priori knowledge of 𝑅 .

4.1 Kernel ridge regression 

A well-studied estimator for 𝑔 0 in this setting is the kernel ridge regression estimate 

ˆ𝑔 𝑛 = arg min 

> 𝑔 ∈ H BART

1

𝑛 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

(𝑌 𝑖 − 𝑔 (𝑋 𝑖 )) 2 + 𝜆 ∥𝑔 ∥2 

> HBART

,

for regularization parameter 𝜆 > 0. The statistical properties of kernel ridge regression and other kernel learning methods are strongly determined by the eigenvalues of their corresponding integral operator 

Σ𝑘 𝑓 (x) :=

∫

> [0,1]𝑝

𝑘 (x, x′)𝑓 (x′)𝜌 (x′)𝑑 x′, (2) where 𝜌 is the density of x. Intuitively, the slower the rate of eigenvalue decay, the larger the corre-sponding RKHS, and realizations from the GP will be less smooth. Note that while the RKHS HBART 

depends on 𝑘 BART , the operator ΣBART := Σ𝑘 BART depends on both 𝑘 BART and the covariate density 𝜌 .The following result characterizes the eigenvalues of the operator ΣBART under a regular BART prior and the assumed regularity conditions on 𝑋 . It follows from the sandwiching relationship between 

𝑘 BART and the ℓ1-Laplacian kernel established in Proposition 3.3. 

Corollary 4.1. If the covariate density 𝜌 is bounded above and bounded away from zero on [0, 1]𝑝 , then for a regular BART prior, the eigenvalues {𝜍 𝑗 }∞ 

> 𝑗 =1

of ΣBART satisfy 

𝜍 𝑗 ≍ 𝑗 −2 log 2(𝑝 −1) ( 𝑗 ).

The eigenvalue decay rate established in Corollary 4.1 allows ˆ𝑔 𝑛 to achieve a minimax-optimal rate for regression in 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ), up to logarithmic factors. For example, the following result is immediate from Theorem 4 of Bak and Lee (2025). 12 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Proposition 4.1. Under the stated assumptions on the data, kernel ridge regression using 𝑘 BART for a regular BART prior achieves √︃ 

𝔼 ( ˆ𝑔 𝑛 (𝑋 ) − 𝑔 0 (𝑋 )) 2 ≲ 𝑛 −1/3 log 𝑝 −1 𝑛. 

In practice, however, working with 𝑘 BART directly requires 𝑂 (𝑛 3) computation, which is impractical for large 𝑛 . We next show that the leading rate in Proposition 4.1 can be obtained with a finite number of trees. 

4.2 Random tree features 

Recall that Ψ𝑗 (x) is the vector of indicators for membership in the leaf nodes of tree 𝑗 given input 

x. Define 𝜙 𝑇 (x) = 𝑇 −1/2 (Ψ1 (x), . . . , Ψ𝑇 (x)) as the concatenated vector of all leaf indicators across all trees, rescaled by 𝑇 −1/2. We call the random vector 𝜙 𝑇 (x) a random tree feature representation of the covariates x.Let 𝚽 ∈ ℝ𝑛 ×𝑀 represent the matrix of random tree features, where 𝑀 = Í𝑇 𝑗 =1 2𝐷 𝑗 is the total number of leaf nodes across all trees. Then consider an approximate estimator ˆ𝑔 𝑛 obtained by performing ridge regression on the random features, 

ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 (x) = 𝜙 𝑇 (x)⊤ ˆ𝛽, where ˆ𝛽 = arg min 

> 𝛽 ∈ℝ𝑀

1

𝑛 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

 𝑌 𝑖 − 𝜙 𝑇 (𝑋 𝑖 )⊤ 𝛽 2 + 𝜆 𝜎 2

> 𝜇

∥𝛽 ∥22

=



𝚽 ⊤𝚽 + ( 𝑛𝜆 /𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

)𝐼 

 −1

𝚽 ⊤y.

(3) This estimator is approximate in two senses: it approximates the infinite-tree kernel ridge estimator 

ˆ𝑔 𝑛 , and it approximates the full BART model with 𝑇 trees, where the tree structures are learned in addition to the leaf parameters 𝝁 .Intuitively, as 𝑇 → ∞ , 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

(𝚽𝚽 ⊤)𝑖𝑗 → 𝑘 BART (x𝑖 , x𝑗 ). Early work in random features established rates on this convergence (Rahimi and Recht, 2007). However, without further assumptions, convergence of 

𝚽𝚽 ⊤ entrywise does not imply convergence of its inverse, nor does it cleanly map onto a convergence rate for ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 itself. Thus studying the convergence of ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 is more complicated than for ˆ𝑔 𝑛 or for the kernel matrix 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

(𝚽𝚽 ⊤). The specific setting here poses unique theoretical challenges as well. While recent work has established convergence rates for a large class of random feature estimates (e.g., Rudi and Rosasco, 2017), these results generally require the random features to be univariate and continuous. These properties are not satisfied by random tree features and therefore cannot be directly applied. We extend results from Rudi and Rosasco (2017) to explicitly consider random tree features and allow for jump discontinuities and random dimension 2𝐷 in the features. We establish the following minimax-optimal convergence rate for ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 , provided the penalty 𝜆 and number of trees 𝑇 are chosen appropriately. 

Theorem 4.1. Under the stated assumptions on the data, for a regular BART prior, if 𝜆 𝑛 ≍

𝑛 −2/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 and 𝑇 𝑛 ≥ 𝑐 𝑇 𝑛 2/3 log (𝑛 )1−2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 for some sufficiently large 𝑐 𝑇 , then there exists a constant 𝑛 0 such that for all 𝑛 > 𝑛 0,√︃ 

𝔼 ( ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 (𝑋 ) − 𝑔 0 (𝑋 )) 2 ≲ 𝑛 −1/3 log (𝑛 ) (𝑝 −1)/ 3.

Moreover, if 𝐷 ≤ 𝑑 + < ∞, then the same result holds with 𝑇 𝑛 ≥ 𝑐 𝑇 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )1+2(𝑝 −1)/ 3.

13 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Dataset 𝑛 𝑝 BART 𝑅 2 

> diamonds

53 940 9 0.979  

> abalone

4 177 8 0.548  

> cane

3 775 31 0.809  

> amenity

3 044 25 0.718  

> edu

2 339 6 0.980  

> budget

1 729 10 0.997  

> rice

1 026 18 0.982  

> attend

838 9 0.670 

Dataset ( cont. ) 𝑛 𝑝 BART 𝑅 2 

> boston

506 13 0.893  

> diabetes

442 10 0.514  

> mpg

392 7 0.881  

> baseball

263 19 0.641  

> cpu

209 7 0.881  

> ais

202 12 0.873  

> servo

167 4 0.925  

> basketball

96 4 0.281        

> Table 1: Sixteen datasets studied in Sections 5.1 and 5.2, arranged by sample size 𝑛 . The column 𝑝
> refers to the number of covariates before one-hot encoding any categorical covariates, and 𝑅 2refers to the out-of-sample 𝑅 2value of the full BART model with default parameters, averaged across cross validation splits and replicates.

Theorem 4.1 demonstrates two advantages of regression on random tree features. First, random tree features can reduce computational complexity compared to both full BART and kernel ridge regression with 𝑘 BART . The latter requires 𝑂 (𝑛 3) computation, while the theorem shows that for bounded tree depths, 𝑂 (𝑛 5/3) computation is sufficient, up to logarithmic factors. We note that it is likely possible to relax the boundedness condition on 𝐷 in Theorem 4.1 to a condition on its tails, and still require only the 𝑛 1/3 lower bound on 𝑇 𝑛 , but such a result would require substantial modifications to the existing proof strategy. In any event, standard BART priors place vanishingly small probability on large 𝐷 (ℙ(𝐷 > 8) < 10 −5 under the Poisson prior) and so the boundedness condition is not restrictive in practice. Second, random tree feature regression achieves learning rates that depend only logarithmically on 

𝑝 , thus avoiding the curse of dimensionality while still learning functions in a rich function space. Moreover, as the results in Figure 1 suggest, when 𝑇 is large, very little learning of the tree structure in full BART occurs, so Theorem 4.1 is also helpful as a simpler-to-analyze model for studying full BART, existing learning rates for which still suffer from the curse of dimensionality. 2

## 5 Empirical Studies 

To complement the theoretical findings in the preceding sections, we conduct three empirical studies of the BART model and the performance of random tree features. We extend the ablation study of Section 2.3 to additional datasets, and consider how tuning 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

affects performance. We then compare the predictive performance of the proposed random tree features with full BART, gradient boosted trees, and random forests, and show that random tree features perform comparably to these alternative methods under default settings. Finally, we examine uncertainty quantification for Bayesian linear regression models fit to random tree features, finding that learning only leaf parameters, as random tree features do, does not degrade uncertainty quantification compared to the full BART model. 

> 2Or require strong assumptions about sparsity in the covariates.

14 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

5.1 Ablation study 

We repeat the study in Section 2.3 on fifteen additional datasets, summarized in Table 1, which are often used in machine learning examples. 3 The data vary across sample sizes 𝑛 , the 𝑛 /𝑝 ratio, the number of continuous covariates, and the signal-to-noise ratio, as measured by the out-of-sample 𝑅 2

of the full BART model. As in the Section 2.3 study, each comparison is averaged across 20 random train-test splits and between 1 and 5 replicates (depending on the dataset size), due to the randomness in fitting the models. Each split holds out 25% of the data for evaluating 𝑅 2.← Final worse    

> −0.75 −0.50 −0.25 0.00
> 575 200 500
> Difference in  R2

(a1) Final iteration minus all iterations (Bayes)    

> ← Initial worse
> 575 200 500

(b1) Initial iteration minus final iteration    

> ← Symmetrized worse
> 575 200 500

Number of trees 

(c1) Symmetrized minus original, final iteration    

> ← Final worse
> −0.75 −0.50 −0.25 0.00
> 575 200 500
> Difference in  R2

(a2) with tuned penalty    

> ← Initial worse
> 575 200 500

(b2) with tuned penalty    

> ← Symmetrized worse
> 575 200 500

Number of trees 

n / p 

> 30 100 300 1000 3000

(c2) with tuned penalty 

Figure 3: Full ablation study . Each panel compares out-of-sample 𝑅 2 values of the posterior mean, for two different regression fits and different numbers of regression trees, across 16 different datasets. The average difference in 𝑅 2 across 20 cross validation splits and multiple replicates is plotted along with 95% confidence intervals, with each dataset’s line colored according to the ratio of observations to covariates. The top panel of each pair uses the original BART prior on the leaf parameters, while the bottom panel tunes the leaf prior variance using LOOCV. (a1) and (a2) Ablating Bayes: 𝑅 2 for the full posterior mean versus the posterior mean conditioned on the tree structure at the final MCMC iteration. (b1) and (b2) Ablating tree learning: 𝑅 2 conditioned on the final-iteration trees versus the initial-iteration trees. (c1) and (c2) Ablating asymmetric trees: 𝑅 2

conditioned on the final-iteration trees versus a symmetrized version of those same trees. 

> 3

For full disclosure, we initially ran experiments on seventeen datasets, but dropped two once we realized that they had a panel data structure that was not suited to BART modeling without additional structure such as fixed effects. For example, in one of these, the strikes dataset, a full BART fit yielded an average out-of-sample 𝑅 2 of −0.208 .

15 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

The top row of Figure 3 shows the results of the ablation study that correspond directly to Figure 1. The overall pattern is extremely similar: as the number of trees increases, the gain in performance from averaging across Bayesian uncertainty, learning tree structure, or using asymmetric trees is minimal. However, there are several datasets that do not follow this overall trend, and some datasets that significantly outperform full BART in panel (b1). We suspect that this is due to two factors: low 𝑛 /𝑝 ,and incorrect tuning of the leaf prior variance 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

or the closely related 𝜅 parameter. Indeed, when we re-fit the comparisons after tuning 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

using leave-one-out cross validation, the results are less variable, and the qualitative patterns are the same across datasets. Incidentally, the dataset with the highest gap in panel (b2) is cane , which contains several high-cardinality categorical covariates; a more careful encoding of these covariates may improve the performance of full BART and the ablated models (Deshpande, 2025). 

5.2 Predictive performance of random BART features 

Next, we compare the predictive performance of ridge regression on random tree features to full BART as well as the two leading tree-based machine learning methods, gradient boosted trees and random forests. For each of the 16 datasets in Table 1, we fit three ridge regression models: one with 75 random tree features, one with 200 such features, and one where the 200 random tree features are augmented with the original covariates entering linearly. In each model, we tune the ridge penalty using leave-one-out cross validation, which can be computed from the singular value decomposition of the feature matrix, or an efficient Monte Carlo estimate of generalized cross validation (GCV), when 𝑛 > 1000 . We compare these random tree feature regressions against BART ( dbarts , Dorie, 2026), random forests (ranger , Wright and Ziegler, 2017), and gradient boosted trees ( xgboost , Chen and Guestrin, 2016). We use the default settings in each package, including 75 trees for BART and 500 trees for random forests. For gradient boosted trees, we use 250 trees (rounds of boosting), and run the method twice: once with the defaults, and once 5-fold cross-validating key hyperparameters, including the learning rate and maximum tree depth. As in the ablation study, all results are averaged over 20 train-test splits and between 1–5 replicates. Figure 4(a) shows the results of this comparison. Regression on 75 random tree features is by far the fastest method, though it also suffers a notable loss in performance compared to the median 𝑅 2 across methods, indicated by the horizontal line. However, increasing the number of trees to 200 improves performance, and augmenting the trees with a linear covariate specification increases performance further, to where it exceeds gradient-boosted trees and is statistically indistinguishable from random forests. The performance of gradient boosting can be improved through cross validation, but only at significant computational cost. Full BART is the best-performing method overall, but it is also 3–4 times slower than the best-performing random tree feature setup. Overall, random tree features are at or near the performance-speed frontier, and their place on that frontier can be adjusted by varying the number of random features. There is significant variability across datasets in the relative performance of the methods, as Figure 4(b) shows, comparing the best-performing random tree feature model to full BART. On some datasets, like the low-𝑅 2 basketball data, random features outperform BART at nearly ten times the speed. On others, like the servo data, random features are moderately faster than full BART but perform around 0.2 worse in 𝑅 2.16 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 Full BART, 75 trees 75 random features 200 random features 200 random features + linear terms XGBoost with defaults XGBoost, cross−validated Random forest 

−0.15 −0.10 −0.05 0.00 

0.1 1.0 10.0 100.0 

Average runtime (s) 

> Average  R2 versus median

(a) Average across all datasets 

−0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 

> basketball ais rice mpg abalone edu diabetes attend cane cpu boston diamonds amenity budget baseball servo
> Average  R2 versus full BART

Runtime ratio to full BART 0.10 0.30 1.00 

(b) 200 features + linear vs. full BART 

Figure 4: Predictive performance of random BART features . (a) Out-of-sample 𝑅 2 values and average runtime for different methods, averaged across 16 different datasets. 𝑅 2 values are normalized by subtracting the median 𝑅 2 for all methods in a given dataset. (b) Out-of-sample 𝑅 2

values for 200 random BART features and additional linear features for continuous covariates, versus the 𝑅 2 value for the full BART fit. Points are colored by the ratio of the runtime of the random features fit to the full BART fit. 

17 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Each of the comparison methods is to some extent sensitive to choices of hyperparameters, and we expect, especially on particular datasets, that the relative performance of the methods could vary with extensive hyperparameter tuning. Thus, we see these results as illustrative of broad patterns in the common case where practitioners use methods off-the-shelf, and not as a definitive comparison of the methods’ performance when each is tuned optimally. Given the comparable performance of random features in Figure 4 to leading tree-based methods, which are often the best-performing machine learning methods for tabular data, it is reasonable to expect that random tree features could perform well in models more complicated than regression. For example, random tree features could be combined with fixed effects, or used to flexibly fit hazard functions that vary with covariates, or interacted with a main variable of interest in a varying-coefficient model. It may be more difficult or impossible for practitioners to adapt the other tree-based methods to these settings, especially if dedicated software is not available. 

5.3 Uncertainty quantification 

Finally, we investigate how well Bayesian linear regression on random tree features quantifies un-certainty compared to the full BART model. While Theorem 4.1 establishes learning rates for the posterior mean ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 when 𝑇 𝑛 and the coefficient prior are chosen appropriately, it does not yield any guarantees on uncertainty quantification. However, the convergence result in Theorem 3.1 suggests that the posterior with infinitely many trees will behave like a Gaussian process. We empirically show in the following subsection that even with a finite number of trees, the uncertainty quantification will be similar. We generate 𝑛 = 400 points from a correlated design bounded to [0, 0.75 ]2, and draw a true 𝑔 0 from a Gaussian process with the BART kernel 𝑘 BART . Adding noise to these points yields an outcome 𝑌 ,which we plot in Figure 5(a) along with 𝑔 0 itself. To compare uncertainty quantification, we first fit a Gaussian process model with the BART kernel  

> 𝑘 BART

to the data. Then we fit the full BART model through dbarts , which automatically rescales the observed points, and four Bayesian regression models on random tree features, two models with 75 trees and two with 250 trees. We also vary whether the tree split points are drawn from [0, 1] or just from the observed range [0, 0.75 ]. We expect the former to behave similarly to the GP model, to which it converges as 𝑇 → ∞ , while the latter may look more like the dbarts fit, which only makes splits in the observed range. After fitting these six models, we measure the posterior standard deviation of the underlying regression function 𝑔 0 across a grid of points in [0, 1]2 and plot the results in panels (b1)–(b6) of Figure 5. The results are encouraging. Regression on both 75 and 250 random tree features drawn on [0, 0.75 ]2

yields uncertainty estimates that look similar to that of the full BART model, with particularly strong agreement with 250 features. Notably, uncertainty in 𝑔 0 does not increase for any of these models outside the support of the covariates. In contrast, the GP uncertainty increases with distance from the sampled points, as does the uncertainty for regression on random tree features drawn from [0, 1]2.The appendix contains additional results comparing average credible interval length and coverage across a range of sample sizes and residual variance; the patterns are similar to those in Figure 5, though coverage and interval length are smaller on average for trees using splits outside the observed range. Thus, despite regression on random tree features not learning the tree structure as full BART does, it appears that it can still yield comparable uncertainty quantification, even with a finite number of trees. 18 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 01           

> 01
> (a) True function and observations
> 01
> 01
> (b1) GP
> 01
> 01
> (b2) Full BART
> 01
> 01
> (b3) 75 features
> 01
> 01
> (b4) 250 features
> 01
> 01
> (b5) 75 on [0, 1]
> 01
> 01
> (b6) 250 on [0, 1]
> Figure 5: Comparison of uncertainty quantification .(a) A function on [

0, 1]2 drawn from 

GP (0, 𝑘 BART ), along with 400 points drawn from a design bounded to [0, 0.75 ]2. (b) Posterior standard deviation for the underlying regression function from the full GP model, a BART model with 75 trees and default parameters, and Bayesian linear regressions fit to random BART features with 75 and 250 trees. Brighter colors indicate higher posterior variance. The rightmost panels (b5) and (b6) use splits for each variable drawn uniformly in [0, 1], while the middle panels use splits drawn from the observed data range. 

Indeed, the similarity to full BART, while exhibiting differences from the GP model, suggests that some of the advantages of a finite number of trees (Chipman et al., 2010; Jeong and Rockova, 2023) may be retained when using random tree features. 

## 6 Discussion 

By considering the 𝑇 → ∞ limit of the BART model, we have shown that BART models converge to a Gaussian process in this limit, and that growing 𝑇 with 𝑛 can yield favorable learning rates for regression, even when no learning of the tree structure occurs. Notably, these rates are sufficiently fast to use within modern double-debiased machine learning methods (Chernozhukov et al., 2018). The random tree features introduced for our study of the learning rates also have practical utility as a flexible and efficient tool for function modeling, and appear to capture uncertainty about as well as full BART. We conclude with several directions for future work, both theoretical and empirical. On the theoreti-cal side, further generalizing and simplifying the arguments establishing learning rates for random features, and extending them to general nuisance function learning with different loss functions, are interesting avenues of future research. As discussed in the introduction, the results here draw connec-tions between random features, past research on learning rates for BART, and regression in spaces like 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ). We suspect there are further interesting results to be found in the intersection of these areas, and beyond the BART model specifically. Within BART, it would be useful to establish formal results on uncertainty quantification, as well as a posterior contraction formulation of Theorem 4.1. 19 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

On the empirical side, we see three interesting directions for future work. First, many flavors of BART have been proposed, including “soft” varieties that use probabilistic splits and can handle smoother functions. Researchers could empirically study the corresponding GP kernel for these models by estimating ℙ[x ∼ℎ x′], and could use random draws from these models’ priors as random features. Adapting the type of random features to the data at hand in this way may yield improved performance at a smaller number of trees. Second, with a small number of random tree features, there is significant variability due to the randomness in the tree structures. It would be of interest to investigate variance reduction techniques, such as quasi-Monte Carlo sampling, to reduce this variability. Such techniques have been fruitfully applied to other types of random features (Liu et al., 2021). Finally, when not all covariates matter equally, BART models have been meaningfully improved by adding a hierarchical variable selection prior on top of the prior on 𝑉 , the splitting variable (Linero, 2018). It would be of great interest to understand if it is possible to approximate these priors through a different penalty on the random tree feature coefficients, and other ways to perform variable selection while using random features. 

## References 

Bak, K.-Y. and Lee, W. (2025). Effect of dimensionality on convergence rates of kernel ridge regression estimator. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference , 236:106228. Balog, M., Lakshminarayanan, B., Ghahramani, Z., Roy, D. M., and Teh, Y. W. (2016). The mondrian kernel. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05241 .Benkeser, D. and Van der Laan, M. (2016). The highly adaptive lasso estimator. In 2016 IEEE international conference on data science and advanced analytics (DSAA) , pages 689–696. IEEE. Bickel, P. J. and Wichura, M. J. (1971). Convergence criteria for multiparameter stochastic processes and some applications. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 42(5):1656–1670. Chen, T. and Guestrin, C. (2016). Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 785–794. Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D., Demirer, M., Duflo, E., Hansen, C., Newey, W., and Robins, J. (2018). Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural parameters. Chipman, H., George, E., and McCulloch, R. (2007). Bayesian ensemble learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 19. Chipman, H. A., George, E. I., and McCulloch, R. E. (2010). Bart: Bayesian additive regression trees. 

The Annals of Applied Statistics , 4(1):266–298. Deshpande, S. K. (2025). flexbart: Flexible bayesian regression trees with categorical predictors. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 34(3):1117–1126. Deshpande, S. K., Bai, R., Balocchi, C., Starling, J. E., and Weiss, J. (2026). Vcbart: Bayesian trees for varying coefficients. Bayesian Analysis , 21(1):281–308. Dorie, V. (2026). dbarts: Discrete Bayesian Additive Regression Trees Sampler . R package version 0.9-33. Dorie, V., Hill, J., Shalit, U., Scott, M., and Cervone, D. (2019). Automated versus do-it-yourself methods for causal inference: Lessons learned from a data analysis competition. Statistical Science , 34(1):43–68. 20 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Dubhashi, D. P. and Ranjan, D. (1996). Balls and bins: A study in negative dependence. BRICS Report Series , 3(25). Hill, J., Linero, A., and Murray, J. (2020). Bayesian additive regression trees: A review and look forward. 

Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 7(1):251–278. Jeong, S. and Rockova, V. (2023). The art of bart: Minimax optimality over nonhomogeneous smooth-ness in high dimension. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(337):1–65. Kanagawa, M., Hennig, P., Sejdinovic, D., and Sriperumbudur, B. K. (2018). Gaussian processes and kernel methods: A review on connections and equivalences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02582 .Kern, J. (2024). Skorokhod topologies: What they are and why we should care. Mathematische Semesterberichte , 71(1):1–18. Lin, Y. (2000). Tensor product space anova models. The Annals of Statistics , 28(3):734–755. Linero, A. R. (2017). A review of tree-based bayesian methods. Communications for Statistical Applica-tions and Methods , 24(6). Linero, A. R. (2018). Bayesian regression trees for high-dimensional prediction and variable selection. 

Journal of the American Statistical Association , 113(522):626–636. Linero, A. R., Bose, S., and Murray, J. (2026). Bayesian additive distribution regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.06462 .Linero, A. R. and Yang, Y. (2018). Bayesian regression tree ensembles that adapt to smoothness and sparsity. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 80(5):1087–1110. Liu, F., Huang, X., Chen, Y., and Suykens, J. A. (2021). Random features for kernel approximation: A survey on algorithms, theory, and beyond. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 44(10):7128–7148. Murray, J. S. (2021). Log-linear bayesian additive regression trees for multinomial logistic and count regression models. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 116(534):756–769. Nash, W., Sellers, T., Talbot, S., Cawthorn, A., and Ford, W. (1994). Abalone. UCI Machine Learning Repository. DOI: https://doi.org/10.24432/C55C7W. Neuhaus, G. (1971). On weak convergence of stochastic processes with multidimensional time param-eter. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 42(4):1285–1295. Petrillo, G. (2024). On the gaussian process limit of bayesian additive regression trees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20289 .Rahimi, A. and Recht, B. (2007). Random features for large-scale kernel machines. Advances in neural information processing systems , 20. Ritter, K., Wasilkowski, G. W., and Woźniakowski, H. (1995). Multivariate integration and approxima-tion for random fields satisfying sacks-ylvisaker conditions. The Annals of Applied Probability , pages 518–540. Ročková, V. and Saha, E. (2019). On theory for BART. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 2839–2848. PMLR. Ročková, V. and van der Pas, S. (2020). Posterior concentration for Bayesian regression trees and forests. The Annals of Statistics , 48(4):2108–2131. 21 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Rudi, A. and Rosasco, L. (2017). Generalization properties of learning with random features. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30. Schuler, A., Hagemeister, A., and van der Laan, M. (2024). Highly adaptive ridge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02680 .Schuler, A., Li, Y., and van der Laan, M. (2022). Lassoed tree boosting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10697 .Sparapani, R. A., Logan, B. R., McCulloch, R. E., and Laud, P. W. (2016). Nonparametric survival analysis using bayesian additive regression trees (bart). Statistics in medicine , 35(16):2741–2753. Van der Laan, M. (2023). Higher order spline highly adaptive lasso estimators of functional parameters: Pointwise asymptotic normality and uniform convergence rates. arXiv preprint 2301.13354 .Van der Pas, S. and Ročková, V. (2017). Bayesian dyadic trees and histograms for regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 30. Wright, M. N. and Ziegler, A. (2017). ranger: A fast implementation of random forests for high dimensional data in C++ and R. Journal of Statistical Software , 77(1):1–17. Xiu, D. (2010). Numerical Methods for Stochastic Computations: A Spectral Method Approach . Princeton University Press. Yee, R., Ghosh, S., and Deshpande, S. K. (2024). Scalable piecewise smoothing with bart. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.07984 .Zhang, T. and Simon, N. (2023). Regression in tensor product spaces by the method of sieves. Electronic journal of statistics , 17(2):3660. 22 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

## A Gaussian process proofs 

A.1 Covariance function proofs 

A.1.1 Proof of Proposition 3.1 

Proof. First, 𝔼 [ℎ(x′)] = 𝔼 [ℎ(x)] = 𝔼 [𝔼 [ℎ(x) | 𝐷, V, S]] = 0. Thus 

Cov [ℎ(x), ℎ (x′)] = 𝔼 [ℎ(x)ℎ(x′)] 

= 𝔼 

" ∑︁ 

> l∈ L

𝜇 l𝜓 l (x)

! ∑︁  

> l′∈ L

𝜇 l′ 𝜓 l′ (x′)

!# 

= 𝔼 

"∑︁ 

> l∈ L

∑︁ l′ ∈ L 

𝜓 l (x)𝜓 l′ (x′)𝔼 [𝜇 l𝜇 l′ |𝜓 l (x), 𝜓 l′ (x′), 𝐷 ]

#

= 𝔼 

"∑︁ 

> l∈ L

∑︁ l′ ∈ L 

𝜓 l (x)𝜓 l′ (x′)𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

1{l = l′}

#

= 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

𝔼 

"∑︁ 

> l∈ L

𝜓 l (x)𝜓 l (x′)

#

For any l, 𝜓 l (x)𝜓 l (x′) = 1 if and only if x and x′ are both in leaf node l. Thus 𝔼 [Íl∈ L 𝜓 l (x)𝜓 l (x′)] =

ℙ[x ∼ℎ x′]. □

A.1.2 Proof of Proposition 3.2 

Proof. From Proposition 3.1, we have 

ℙ[x ∼ℎ x′] = 𝔼 

"∑︁ 

> l∈ L

𝜓 l (x)𝜓 l (x′)

#

= 𝔼 

"∑︁ 

> l∈ L
> 𝐷

Ö

> 𝑘 =1

1{𝑙 𝑘 𝑥 𝑣 𝑘 <𝑙 𝑘 𝑙 𝑘 𝑠 𝑘 }1{𝑙 𝑘 𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑣 𝑘

<𝑙 𝑘 𝑙 𝑘 𝑠 𝑘 }

#

= 𝔼 



> 𝐷

Ö

> 𝑘 =1

∑︁ 𝑙 ∈ {− 1,1}

𝔼 

h

1{𝑙𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 <𝑙 𝑙𝑆 𝑘 }1{𝑙𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

<𝑙 𝑙𝑆 𝑘 } 𝐷 

i

.

The final step follows by the distributive property and the fact that each summand is independent of the others given 𝐷 , and so the expectation may be brought inside the product. Let 𝑈 ∼ Unif [0, 1], so 

𝐹 𝑆 (𝑆 𝑘 ) ∼ 𝑈 . Then we can compute the inner expectation, conditioning additionally on 𝑉 𝑘 , as 

𝔼 

h

1{𝑙𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 <𝑙 𝑙𝑆 𝑘 }1{𝑙𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

<𝑙 𝑙𝑆 𝑘 } 𝑉 𝑘 , 𝐷 

i

= ℙ

h

𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 < 𝑆 𝑘 , 𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

< 𝑆 𝑘 𝑉 𝑘 , 𝐷 

i

1{𝑙 = 1} + ℙ

h

𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 ≥ 𝑆 𝑘 , 𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

≥ 𝑆 𝑘 𝑉 𝑘 , 𝐷 

i

1{𝑙 = −1}

= ℙ[𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 ) < 𝑈, 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

) < 𝑈 ]1{𝑙 = 1}+ ℙ[𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 ) ≥ 𝑈, 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

) ≥ 𝑈 ]1{𝑙 = −1}

= (1 − 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 ∨ 𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

)) 1{𝑙 = 1} + 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 ∧ 𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

)1{𝑙 = −1},

23 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

where ∨ indicates the maximum and ∧ the minimum. Then summing over 𝑙 ∈ {− 1, 1} yields ∑︁ 

> 𝑙 ∈ {− 1,1}

𝔼 

h

1{𝑙𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 <𝑙 𝑙𝑆 𝑘 }1{𝑙𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

<𝑙 𝑙𝑆 𝑘 } 𝐷, 𝑉 𝑘 

i

= (1 − 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 ∨ 𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

)) + 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 ∧ 𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

)

= 1 − | 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 ) − 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

)| .

Notice that 

𝔼 

h

1 − | 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 ) − 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

)| 𝐷 

i

= 1 −

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> 𝑣 =1

|𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑣 ) − 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 ′

> 𝑣

)| 𝑓 𝑉 (𝑣 )

= 1 − 𝑑 BART (x, x′),

so all together we have ∑︁ 

> 𝑙 ∈ {− 1,1}

𝔼 

h

1{𝑙𝑥 𝑉 𝑘 <𝑙 𝑙𝑆 𝑘 }1{𝑙𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑉 𝑘

<𝑙 𝑙𝑆 𝑘 } 𝐷 

i

= 1 − 𝑑 BART (x, x′).

Substituting the above result, which no longer depends on 𝐷 , we find 

ℙ[x ∼ℎ x′] = 𝔼 

" 𝐷 Ö

> 𝑘 =1

(1 − 𝑑 BART (x, x′)) 

#

= 𝔼 (1 − 𝑑 BART (x, x′)) 𝐷 

=

> ∞

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

(1 − 𝑑 BART (x, x′)) 𝑘 𝑓 𝐷 (𝑘 ).

□

A.1.3 Proof of Corollary 3.1 

Proof. In this case 

𝑓 𝐷 (𝑘 ) = 𝑒 −𝑟 

1 − 𝑒 −𝑟 · 𝑟 𝑘 

𝑘 ! ,

so 

𝑘 BART (x, x′) = 𝜎 2

> 𝜇

𝑒 −𝑟 

1 − 𝑒 −𝑟 

> ∞

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

1

𝑘 ! (𝑟 − 𝑟𝑑 BART (x, x′)) 𝑘 

= 𝜎 2

> 𝜇

𝑒 −𝑟 

1 − 𝑒 −𝑟 (exp (𝑟 − 𝑟𝑑 BART (x, x′)) − 1)

= 𝜎 2

> 𝜇

1 − 𝑒 −𝑟 (exp (− 𝑟𝑑 BART (x, x′)) − 𝑒 −𝑟 ) .

□

A.1.4 Proof of Proposition 3.3 and Corollary 4.1 

We begin with a lemma that allows us to work with the simpler version of ΣBART in which both 𝑆 and 

𝑋 are uniform. 24 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Lemma A.1. Let 𝐹 (x) = (𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 1), . . . , 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑝 )) , and suppose the standing assumptions on 𝑓 𝑆 hold. Define the transformed BART kernel 

𝑘 𝑢 (u, u′) := 𝑘 BART (𝐹 −1 (u), 𝐹 −1 (u′)) ,

so that 𝑘 BART (x, x′) = 𝑘 𝑢 (𝐹 (x), 𝐹 (x′)) . Then: 1. The RKHS HBART of 𝑘 BART is the pullback by 𝐹 of the RKHS H𝑢 of 𝑘 𝑢 :

HBART = {𝑔 ◦ 𝐹 : 𝑔 ∈ H 𝑢 }, ∥𝑔 ◦ 𝐹 ∥HBART = ∥𝑔 ∥H𝑢 .

In particular, H𝑢 is norm-equivalent to 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ) if and only if HBART is. 2. Suppose 𝜌 is bounded above and bounded away from zero. Define the transformed-kernel operator under the uniform density 

(Σ𝑢 ℎ)( u) :=

∫

> [0,1]𝑝

𝑘 𝑢 (u, u′)ℎ(u′) 𝑑 u′,

on 𝐿 2 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ). If 𝜍 𝑗 ( 𝐴 ) denotes the ordered nonzero eigenvalues of an operator 𝐴 , then there exist constants 0 < 𝑚 ≤ 𝑀 < ∞ such that, for every 𝑗 ,

𝑚𝜍 𝑗 (Σ𝑢 ) ≤ 𝜍 𝑗 (ΣBART ) ≤ 𝑀𝜍 𝑗 (Σ𝑢 ).

Proof. Continuity and strict positivity of 𝑓 𝑆 on [0, 1] imply that 0 < 𝑚 𝑆 ≤ 𝑓 𝑆 ≤ 𝑀 𝑆 < ∞ for some constants 𝑚 𝑆 , 𝑀 𝑆 . Thus 𝐹 is a coordinatewise bĳection with bounded derivative and bounded inverse derivative. The standard pullback characterization of RKHSs gives 

HBART = {𝑔 ◦ 𝐹 : 𝑔 ∈ H 𝑢 }, ∥𝑔 ◦ 𝐹 ∥HBART = ∥𝑔 ∥H𝑢 .

For a ∈ { 0, 1}𝑝 , the weak chain rule expresses 𝐷 a (𝑔 ◦𝐹 ) as (𝐷 a 𝑔 )◦ 𝐹 times a product of the corresponding 

𝑓 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑣 ). The bounds above and a change of variables therefore show that composition by 𝐹 is bounded on 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ). The same argument for 𝐹 −1 proves bounded invertibility and hence the first claim. For the second claim, the pushforward of 𝜌 (x)𝑑 x under 𝐹 has density 

𝑞 (u) = 𝜌 (𝐹 −1 (u)) 

Î𝑝 𝑣 =1 𝑓 𝑆 (𝐹 −1 

> 𝑆

(𝑢 𝑣 )) 

with respect to 𝑑 u, and 0 < 𝑚 ≤ 𝑞 ≤ 𝑀 < ∞. Define 

(Σ𝑢,𝑞 ℎ)( u) :=

∫

> [0,1]𝑝

𝑘 𝑢 (u, u′)ℎ(u′)𝑞 (u′) 𝑑 u′,

as an operator on 𝐿 2 (𝑞 (u)𝑑 u). The unitary map ℎ ↦ → ℎ ◦ 𝐹 identifies ΣBART with Σ𝑢,𝑞 . Multiplication by 

√𝑞 further identifies Σ𝑢,𝑞 with 𝑀 √𝑞 Σ𝑢 𝑀 √𝑞 on 𝐿 2 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ), where 𝑀 ℎ denotes multiplication by ℎ. Thus 

ΣBART , Σ𝑢,𝑞 , and 𝑀 √𝑞 Σ𝑢 𝑀 √𝑞 have the same eigenvalues. These in turn equal those of Σ1/2 

> 𝑢

𝑀 𝑞 Σ1/2 

> 𝑢

, since the latter two operators are 𝐴𝐴 ∗ and 𝐴 ∗ 𝐴 for 𝐴 = 𝑀 √𝑞 Σ1/2 

> 𝑢

. Then, since 𝑚𝐼 ⪯ 𝑀 𝑞 ⪯ 𝑀𝐼 by boundedness of 𝑞 ,

𝑚 Σ𝑢 ⪯ Σ1/2 

> 𝑢

𝑀 𝑞 Σ1/2 

> 𝑢

⪯ 𝑀 Σ𝑢 ,

and the result follows from the min–max principle for eigenvalues. □

25 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

We can now prove Proposition 3.3 and Corollary 4.1. 

Proof of Proposition 3.3. By Lemma A.1, it suffices to work in the transformed coordinates 𝑢 𝑣 = 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑣 ).We first consider the kernel conditional on 𝐷 = 𝑑 ,

𝑘 𝑑 (u, u′) = 1 −

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> 𝑣 =1

𝑓 𝑉 (𝑣 ) 𝑢 𝑣 − 𝑢 ′

> 𝑣

!𝑑 

.

We will sandwich this kernel in the Loewner order between two kernels which are easier to analyze. To compare the fixed-depth kernels, let ℓ𝑚 (𝑢, 𝑢 ′) = (1 − | 𝑢 − 𝑢 ′ |) 𝑚 for 𝑚 ≥ 1, and let ℓ0 = 1. This lets us expand 𝑘 𝑑 as 

𝑘 𝑑 (u, u′) =∑︁  

> n∈ { 0,1,... }𝑝
> Í𝑣 𝑛 𝑣 =𝑑

 𝑑 𝑛 1, . . . , 𝑛 𝑝 

 𝑝 Ö

> 𝑣 =1

𝑓 𝑉 (𝑣 )𝑛 𝑣 ℓ𝑛 𝑣 (𝑢 𝑣 , 𝑢 ′

> 𝑣

),

where n = (𝑛 1, . . . , 𝑛 𝑝 ) are the multinomial counts. Note that ℓ1 (𝑢, 𝑢 ′) = 1− | 𝑢 −𝑢 ′ | is itself a nonnegative definite kernel: it is the probability that 𝑢 and 𝑢 ′ are not separated by a single uniform split. Since 

ℓ𝑚 = (ℓ1)𝑚 , the Schur product theorem shows that ℓ𝑚 is also a nonnegative definite kernel for every integer 𝑚 ≥ 1; the same is plainly true of the constant kernel ℓ0.We next compare these kernels quantitatively. Extend ℓ𝑚 to the stationary kernel ¯ℓ𝑚 (ℎ) = (1 − | ℎ|) 𝑚 

> +

on ℝ. The triangular kernel ¯ℓ1 is nonnegative definite, since it is the convolution of two indicator functions, and hence so is each power ¯ℓ𝑚 . For 𝑚 ≥ 2 and 𝜔 ≠ 0, the Fourier transform can be integrated by parts twice: 

b¯ℓ𝑚 (𝜔 ) = 2

∫ 10

(1 − 𝑡 )𝑚 cos (𝜔𝑡 ) 𝑑𝑡 

= 2𝑚 𝜔 

∫ 10

(1 − 𝑡 )𝑚 −1 sin (𝜔𝑡 ) 𝑑𝑡 

= 2𝑚 𝜔 2



1 − ( 𝑚 − 1)

∫ 10

(1 − 𝑡 )𝑚 −2 cos (𝜔𝑡 ) 𝑑𝑡 



.

For 𝑚 ≥ 2, the absolute value of the integral is at most ∫ 10 (1 − 𝑡 )𝑚 −2𝑑𝑡 = (𝑚 − 1)−1, so the quantity in braces is at most two. For 𝑚 = 1, direct integration gives b¯ℓ1 (𝜔 ) = 2(1 − cos 𝜔 )/ 𝜔 2 ≤ 4/𝜔 2. Thus 

b¯ℓ𝑚 (𝜔 ) ≤ 4𝑚 /𝜔 2 for every 𝑚 ≥ 1 when |𝜔 | ≥ 1. For |𝜔 | ≤ 1, the Fourier-integral representation instead gives b¯ℓ𝑚 (𝜔 ) ≤ 2 ∫ 10 (1 − 𝑡 )𝑚 𝑑𝑡 = 2/( 𝑚 + 1). Combining the two bounds gives b¯ℓ𝑚 (𝜔 ) ≤ 𝐶𝑚 (1 + 𝜔 2)−1 for an absolute constant 𝐶 . The Fourier transform of the Laplacian kernel ¯𝐿 (ℎ) = exp (−| ℎ|) is 2(1 + 𝜔 2)−1.The spectral characterization of stationary kernels therefore gives 

¯ℓ𝑚 ⪯ 𝐶𝑚 ¯𝐿 

in the Loewner order on ℝ, and restricting both kernels to [0, 1] preserves this ordering. For each fixed 𝑚 ≥ 2, we can also bound ¯ℓ𝑚 from below. Indeed, the quantity in braces above is 

1 − 𝔼 [cos (𝜔𝑇 )] , where 𝑇 has density (𝑚 − 1)( 1 − 𝑡 )𝑚 −2 on [0, 1]. It is strictly positive for 𝜔 ≠ 0, tends to one as |𝜔 | → ∞ , and its second-order expansion at zero is positive. These facts imply that, for some 

𝑏 𝑚 > 0, 1 − 𝔼 [cos (𝜔𝑇 )] ≥ 𝑏 𝑚 min {𝜔 2, 1} for all 𝜔 . Substituting this into the preceding display gives 

b¯ℓ𝑚 (𝜔 ) ≥ 2𝑚𝑏 𝑚 for 0 < |𝜔 | ≤ 1 and b¯ℓ𝑚 (𝜔 ) ≥ 2𝑚𝑏 𝑚 𝜔 −2 for |𝜔 | > 1; the first bound also holds at zero by continuity. These two bounds give b¯ℓ𝑚 (𝜔 ) ≥ 𝑎 𝑚 (1 + 𝜔 2)−1 for some 𝑎 𝑚 > 0. Comparing this spectral density to that of ¯𝐿 gives 

𝑎 𝑚 ¯𝐿 ⪯ ¯ℓ𝑚 

26 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

for each 𝑚 ≥ 2, and we can likewise restrict this to [0, 1]. For 𝑚 = 1, write 

ℓ1 (𝑢, 𝑢 ′) = min {𝑢, 𝑢 ′} + min {1 − 𝑢, 1 − 𝑢 ′}.

The two summands are the covariance kernels of Brownian motion started at the left and right endpoints, respectively. Their RKHSs are the subspaces of 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]) of functions vanishing at 0

and at 1. The RKHS of their sum is the sum of these two spaces, which is all of 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]) : for 

𝑔 ∈ 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]) , the functions 𝑢𝑔 (𝑢 ) and (1 − 𝑢 )𝑔 (𝑢 ) belong to the two respective subspaces and sum to 𝑔 .This decomposition is bounded in the Sobolev norm, so the resulting RKHS norm is equivalent to the 

𝑊 1 norm. Thus we have extended the preceding lower bound to 𝑚 = 1 as well, and have established 

𝑎 𝑚 𝐿 ⪯ ℓ𝑚 ⪯ 𝐶𝑚𝐿 (4) in the Loewner order, where 𝐿 is the restriction of ¯𝐿 to [0, 1], where 𝑎 𝑚 > 0 may depend on 𝑚 , while 

𝐶 does not. This ordering equivalently maps to an inclusion ordering of the kernel’s corresponding RKHSs. Finally, the RKHS of ℓ0 is the one-dimensional space of constant functions. Its inclusion in the RKHS of 𝐿 is bounded, so the standard RKHS inclusion criterion gives ℓ0 ⪯ 𝐶 0 𝐿 for some 𝐶 0 < ∞. Increasing 

𝐶 if necessary, we therefore have ℓ𝑚 ⪯ 𝐶 (1 + 𝑚 )𝐿 for every 𝑚 ≥ 0.Having sandwiched ℓ𝑚 , we can sandwich 𝑘 𝑑 as well. Since kernel ordering is preserved under tensor products, for every count vector n appearing in the multinomial expansion, 

> 𝑝

Ö

> 𝑣 =1

ℓ𝑛 𝑣 ⪯ 𝐶 𝑝 𝑝 Ö

> 𝑣 =1

(1 + 𝑛 𝑣 ) 𝐾 ⊗ , where 𝐾 ⊗ :=

> 𝑝

Ö

> 𝑣 =1

𝐿. 

The multinomial coefficients and the factors Î𝑣 𝑓 𝑉 (𝑣 )𝑛 𝑣 are nonnegative and sum to one over n.Moreover, Î𝑣 (1 + 𝑛 𝑣 ) ≤ ( 1 + 𝑑 )𝑝 whenever Í𝑣 𝑛 𝑣 = 𝑑 . Summing the preceding comparison over the multinomial expansion therefore yields 

𝑘 𝑑 ⪯ 𝐶 𝑝 (1 + 𝑑 )𝑝 𝐾 ⊗ .

If 𝑑 ≥ 𝑝 , the multinomial sum also contains a term with every 𝑛 𝑣 ≥ 1, since 𝑓 𝑉 has support on all of [𝑝 ].Fix one such count vector n∗. By the lower bound in Eq. 4, 

> 𝑝

Ö

> 𝑣 =1

ℓ𝑛 ∗ 

> 𝑣

⪰

> 𝑝

Ö

> 𝑣 =1

𝑎 𝑛 ∗

> 𝑣

!

𝐾 ⊗ .

All other terms in the expansion are nonnegative definite, so they can only increase the kernel in the nonnegative-definite ordering. It follows that 

𝑘 𝑑 ⪰ 𝑐 𝑑 𝐾 ⊗

for some 𝑐 𝑑 > 0 whenever 𝑑 ≥ 𝑝 .We can now extend the bounds on 𝑘 𝑑 to bounds on 𝑘 BART itself. Representing 𝑘 BART as a mixture over the 𝑘 𝑑 as 

𝑘 BART = 𝜎 2

> 𝜇

∑︁ 𝑑 ≥1

𝑓 𝐷 (𝑑 )𝑘 𝑑 ,

27 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

we consider comparing 𝑘 BART to kernels built from portions of the total sum. Since ℙ(𝐷 ≥ 𝑝 ) > 0,there is some fixed 𝑑 0 ≥ 𝑝 for which 𝑓 𝐷 (𝑑 0) > 0. Keeping only that nonnegative-definite term in the mixture gives 

𝑘 BART ⪰ 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

𝑓 𝐷 (𝑑 0)𝑘 𝑑 0 ⪰ 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

𝑓 𝐷 (𝑑 0)𝑐 𝑑 0 𝐾 ⊗ .

In the other direction, summing the fixed-depth upper bounds gives 

𝑘 BART ⪯ 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

𝐶 𝑝 𝔼 [( 1 + 𝐷 )𝑝 ] 𝐾 ⊗ ⪯ 𝐶 ′ 𝐾 ⊗ ,

where 𝐶 ′ < ∞ because 𝔼 [𝐷 𝑝 ] < ∞. Hence 𝑐𝐾 ⊗ ⪯ 𝑘 BART ⪯ 𝐶 ′ 𝐾 ⊗ for some 0 < 𝑐 < 𝐶 ′ < ∞. The two-sided kernel ordering shows that the corresponding RKHSs are norm-equivalent. Since the RKHS of 𝐿 is 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]) , the RKHS of 𝐾 ⊗ is the tensor product Ë𝑝 𝑣 =1 𝑊 1 ([ 0, 1]) = 𝑆 1 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ). This proves Proposition 3.3. □

Proof of Corollary 4.1. By the second part of Lemma A.1, the eigenvalues of ΣBART are equivalent up to constants to those of the transformed kernel under the uniform density. By the kernel sandwich in Proposition 3.3 and the min–max characterization of eigenvalues, these are in turn equivalent up to constants to the eigenvalues {𝜌 𝑗 } of the uniform-density operator associated with 𝐾 ⊗ .Finally, the eigenvalues of the univariate operator associated with 𝐿 are of order 𝑗 −2 (Ritter et al., 1995). The eigenvalues of its 𝑝 -fold tensor product 𝐾 ⊗ are therefore all products Î𝑝 𝑣 =1 𝜌 (1) 

> 𝑗 𝑣

, where 𝜌 (1) 

> 𝑗

≍ 𝑗 −2.The number of these products exceeding 𝜆 is, up to constants, the number of integer tuples satisfying Î𝑣 𝑗 𝑣 ≲ 𝜆 −1/2, which is of order 𝜆 −1/2 log 𝑝 −1 (1/𝜆 ). Inverting this counting relation shows that the reordered eigenvalues satisfy 𝜌 𝑗 ≍ 𝑗 −2 log 2(𝑝 −1) ( 𝑗 ); see also Zhang and Simon (2023), Appendix B. □

A.2 GP convergence proofs 

A.2.1 Proof of Lemma 3.1 

Proof. Let 𝑍 𝑗 := (ℎ𝑗 (x1), . . . , ℎ 𝑗 (x𝑘 )) ⊤ be the vector of outputs from a tree ℎ𝑗 drawn independently from the BART prior, so 

(𝑔 𝑇 (x1), . . . , 𝑔 𝑇 (x𝑘 )) ∼ 𝑇 −1/2

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑍 𝑗 .

For every 𝑗 , we have 𝔼 [𝑍 𝑗 ] = 0 by iterated expectations and Cov [𝑍 𝑗 ] = 𝐾 by Proposition 3.1. Then the result follows from the multivariate central limit theorem. □

A.2.2 Proof of Theorem 3.1 

The proof of Theorem 3.1 requires several preliminary lemmas and setup. We say that a tree function prior has 𝐾 -Lipschitz separation probability if the conclusion of Lemma A.2 holds, i.e., there exists a 1 ≤ 𝐾 < ∞ such that for any x, y ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 , ℙ[x̸ ∼ℎ y | 𝐷 ] ≤ 𝐾 𝐷 ∥x − y∥1.

Lemma A.2. Let x, y ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 and ℎ be a tree function drawn from the symmetric BART prior. If 𝐹 𝑆 is Lipschitz continuous with constant 1 ≤ 𝐾 𝑆 < ∞, then 

ℙ[x̸ ∼ℎ y | 𝐷 ] ≤ 𝐾 𝑆 𝐷 ∥x − y∥1,

28 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Proof. By the proof of Proposition 3.1, 

ℙ[x̸ ∼ℎ y] = 1 −

> ∞

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

(1 − 𝑑 BART (x, y)) 𝑘 𝑓 𝐷 (𝑘 ) = 1 − 𝔼 (1 − 𝑑 BART (x, y)) 𝐷  ,

so ℙ[x̸ ∼ℎ y | 𝐷 ] = 1 − ( 1 − 𝑑 BART (x, y)) 𝐷 . Now, 

𝜕 𝜕𝛿 (1 − 𝛿 )𝑑 = −𝑑 (1 − 𝛿 )𝑑 −1 and 

𝜕 2

𝜕𝛿 2 (1 − 𝛿 )𝑑 = 𝑑 (𝑑 − 1)( 1 − 𝛿 )𝑑 −2.

Thus ℙ[x̸ ∼ℎ y | 𝐷 ] is concave in 𝑑 BART (x, y) everywhere, and we can therefore upper bound it by the tangent line at the origin, i.e., 

ℙ[x̸ ∼ℎ y | 𝐷 ] ≤ ℙ[x̸ ∼ℎ x | 𝐷 ] + 𝐷 (1 − 0)𝐷 −1𝑑 BART (x, y) = 𝐷𝑑 BART (x, y).

Then, 

𝑑 BART (x, y) :=

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> 𝑣 =1

𝑓 𝑉 (𝑣 )| 𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑣 ) − 𝐹 𝑆 ( 𝑦 𝑣 )| ≤

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> 𝑣 =1

|𝐹 𝑆 (𝑥 𝑣 ) − 𝐹 𝑆 ( 𝑦 𝑣 )| ≤

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> 𝑣 =1

𝐾 𝑆 |𝑥 𝑣 − 𝑦 𝑣 | = 𝐾 𝑆 ∥x − y∥1.

Thus ℙ[x̸ ∼ℎ y | 𝐷 ] ≤ 𝐾 𝑆 𝐷 ∥x − y∥1, as claimed. □

Let 𝑆 ⊆ [ 𝑝 ] represent a set of coordinates. Let x𝑆 represent a vector, where the coordinates in 𝑆 are identical to x, and the rest are zero. Let x−𝑆 be defined identically, with the complement of 𝑆 . For a point x and an offset 𝜖 ∈ ℝ𝑝 

> ≥0

, define the closed block [x, x+𝜖 ] by 

[x, x+𝜖 ] =

> 𝑝

Ö

> 𝑞 =1

[𝑥 𝑞 , 𝑥 𝑞 + 𝜖 𝑞 ].

The behavior of tree functions on these closed blocks is key to establishing tightness of the BART process through several critical lemmas. We call the 𝑞 where 𝜖 𝑞 > 0 the active dimensions of the (closed) block, and we define the volume of the block as 𝜈 ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) := Î𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0 |𝜖 𝑞 |, and the increment of ℎ around the block as 

Δℎ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) :=∑︁ 

> 𝑆 ⊆ { 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0}

(− 1)|𝑆 | ℎ(x𝑆 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆

).

For example, if 𝑝 = 3, x = 0, and 𝜖 = (1, 0, 1), then the active dimensions are {1, 3}, the volume is 1, and 

Δℎ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) = ℎ(0, 0, 0) − ℎ(1, 0, 0) − ℎ(0, 0, 1) + ℎ(1, 0, 1).

The points V ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) = {x𝑆 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆

: 𝑆 ⊆ { 𝑞 : 𝜖 𝑞 > 0}} represent the active vertices of the closed block 

[x, x+𝜖 ]. For symmetric trees, we can bound the probability that all the active vertices are in different leaf nodes by the volume of the block. 29 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Lemma A.3. Let A ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) represent the event that all the active vertices V ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) for a closed block 

[x, x+𝜖 ] are in different leaf nodes in a symmetric tree ℎ, i.e., 

A ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) :=

Ù 

> a≠b∈ V ( [ x,x+𝜖 ] )

a̸ ∼ℎ b.

If ℎ has 𝐾 -Lipschitz separation probability , then 

ℙ A ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) 𝐷  ≤ ( 𝐾 𝐷 )𝑝 𝜈 ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) .

Proof. We can rewrite ℙ[A ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) | 𝐷 ] as 

ℙ A ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) 𝐷  = ℙ

Ù 

> a≠b∈ V ( [ x,x+𝜖 ] )

a̸ ∼ℎ b 𝐷 



= ℙ

Ù

> 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0

Ù

> 𝑆 𝑎 =𝑆 𝑏 ∪{ 𝑞 }

(x𝑆 𝑎 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑎

)̸ ∼ ℎ (x𝑆 𝑏 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑏

) 𝐷 



,

where the inner intersection is over all 𝑆 𝑎 , 𝑆 𝑏 ⊆ { 𝑞 ∈ [ 𝑝 ] : 𝜖 𝑞 > 0} that differ only in their inclusion of 𝑞 .In other words, for each active dimension 𝑞 , we examine pairs of points that differ only in coordinate 

𝑞 . But in fact these events are all the same due to the symmetry of the tree: if two points that differ in coordinate 𝑞 are in different leaf nodes, then there exists some decision rule 𝑘 with 𝑉 𝑘 = 𝑞 and 

𝑥 𝑞 < 𝑆 𝑘 ≤ 𝑥 𝑞 + 𝜖 𝑞 . This decision rule will also separate any other pair of points that differ in coordinate 

𝑞 . Thus 

ℙ

Ù

> 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0

Ù

> 𝑆 𝑎 =𝑆 𝑏 ∪{ 𝑞 }

(x𝑆 𝑎 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑎

)̸ ∼ ℎ (x𝑆 𝑏 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑏

) 𝐷 



= ℙ

Ù

> 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0

x̸ ∼ℎ (x−{ 𝑞 } + x+𝜖  

> {𝑞 }

) 𝐷 



.

This final probability is the event that a decision rule separates x from x+𝜖 in each coordinate. There are 𝐷 decision rules, drawn independently given 𝐷 . As a result, the set of events considered on the right-hand side are negatively associated, conditional on 𝐷 (Dubhashi and Ranjan, 1996). This means that 

ℙ

Ù

> 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0

x̸ ∼ℎ (x−{ 𝑞 } + x+𝜖  

> {𝑞 }

) 𝐷 



≤

Ö

> 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0

ℙ

h

x̸ ∼ℎ (x−{ 𝑞 } + x+𝜖  

> {𝑞 }

) 𝐷 

i

.

Since x − ( x−{ 𝑞 } + x+𝜖  

> {𝑞 }

) 1 = 𝜖 𝑞 , by assumption we conclude 

ℙ A ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) 𝐷  ≤

Ö

> 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0

𝐾 𝐷 |𝜖 𝑞 | ≤ ( 𝐾 𝐷 )𝑝 𝜈 ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) . □

Consider now a general tree ℎ and block 𝐵 . The following result on the moments of ℎ(𝐵 ) will be useful. 

Lemma A.4. Let ℎ be a tree drawn from the symmetric BART prior, and let 𝐵 = [x, x+𝜖 ] be a closed block. Then 𝔼 [Δℎ(𝐵 )] = 0 and if ℎ has 𝐾 -Lipschitz separation probability and 𝔼 [𝐷 𝑝 ] < ∞, then 

𝔼 Δℎ (𝐵 )2 ≤ 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 𝑝 ] 𝜈 (𝐵 ).

30 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Proof. Since ℎ is mean zero pointwise, each term in Δℎ (𝐵 ) is mean zero, and the first result is immediate. For the second moment bound, notice that unless there is a decision rule separating each pair of corner points along each coordinate dimension, the increment Δℎ (𝐵 ) will be zero. To see this, let 𝑞 be the dimension without a separating rule. Then for any 𝑆 𝑎 , 𝑆 𝑏 ⊆ [ 𝑝 ] differing only in the inclusion of 

𝑞 , the points x𝑆 𝑎 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑎

and x𝑆 𝑏 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑏

are in the same leaf node, and so ℎ(x𝑆 𝑎 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑎

) = ℎ(x𝑆 𝑏 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑏

).Thus 

Δℎ (𝐵 ) =∑︁ 

> 𝑆 ⊆ { 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0}

(− 1)|𝑆 | ℎ(x𝑆 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆

)

=∑︁ 

> 𝑆 𝑎 =𝑆 𝑏 ∪{ 𝑞 }

(− 1)|𝑆 𝑎 | (ℎ(x𝑆 𝑎 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑎

) − ℎ(x𝑆 𝑏 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆 𝑏

)) = 0.

Thus by the law of total expectation, 

𝔼 Δℎ (𝐵 )2 = 𝔼 Δℎ (𝐵 )2 A{V ( 𝐵 )}  ℙ[A{V ( 𝐵 )}] .

Since the leaf parameters are drawn independently, conditional on A{V ( 𝐵 )} (all corner points in different leaf nodes), the value of ℎ at each corner point is independent, and so 

𝔼 Δℎ (𝐵 )2 = 𝔼 

©«∑︁ 𝑆 ⊆ { 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0}

(− 1)|𝑠 | ℎ(x𝑆 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆

)ª®¬

> 2

A{V ( 𝐵 )}] ℙ[A{V ( 𝐵 )} 



=∑︁ 

> 𝑆 ⊆ { 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0}

𝔼 (− 1)2|𝑠 | ℎ(x𝑆 + x+𝜖  

> −𝑆

)2 A{V ( 𝐵 )}] ℙ[A{V ( 𝐵 )} 

= 2| { 𝑞 :𝜖 𝑞 >0} | 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

× 𝔼 [ℙ[A{V ( 𝐵 )} | 𝐷 ]] ≤ 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 𝑝 ] 𝜈 (𝐵 ).

(5) 

□

We now turn our attention to 

Δ𝑔 𝑇 ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) = 1

𝑇 1/2

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

Δ𝑗 ([ x, x+𝜖 ]) ,

where we write Δ𝑗 = Δℎ𝑗 for simplicity, and in particular the product of the increments around two blocks 𝐵 and 𝐶 . We say that two blocks 𝐵 = [x, x+𝜖 𝐵 

] and 𝐶 = [y, y+𝜖 𝐶 

] are compatible if for each 𝑞 ∈ [ 𝑝 ],either [𝑥 𝑞 , 𝑥 𝑞 + 𝜖 𝐵 𝑞 ] = [ 𝑦 𝑞 , 𝑦 𝑞 + 𝜖 𝐶 𝑞 ] or the intervals intersect at a point or not at all. For compatible blocks, we can calculate a volume 𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 ); by our definition of volume above, this is the volume over the dimensions where the blocks are identical, i.e., 

𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 ) :=

Ö   

> 𝑞 :[𝑥 𝑞 ,𝑥 𝑞 +𝜖 𝐵 𝑞 ]=[𝑦 𝑞 ,𝑦 𝑞 +𝜖 𝐶 𝑞 ]

|𝜖 𝐵 𝑞 |.

When there are no such dimensions, we define 𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 ) = 1. For example, when 𝑝 = 3 with two cubes 

𝐵 and 𝐶 of the same size, all of the following arrangements are compatible: 𝐵 and 𝐶 identical, 𝐵 and 𝐶 

sharing a face, 𝐵 and 𝐶 aligned on an axis but not touching, and 𝐵 and 𝐶 diagonally separated. 31 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Lemma A.5. If ℎ has 𝐾 -Lipschitz separation probability and 𝔼 [𝐷 2𝑝 ] < ∞, then there exists a constant 

𝐾 𝑝 < ∞ such that for any BART function 𝑔 𝑇 with 𝑇 trees, and any two compatible blocks 𝐵 and 𝐶 ,

𝔼 |Δ𝑔 𝑇 (𝐵 )| 2 |Δ𝑔 𝑇 (𝐶 )| 2 ≤ 𝐾 𝑝 𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 )



1 + 1

𝑇 𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 )



.

Proof. Substituting, 

𝔼 |Δ𝑔 𝑇 (𝐵 )| 2 |Δ𝑔 𝑇 (𝐶 )| 2 =𝔼 

©«

1

𝑇 1/2

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

Δ𝑗 (𝐵 )ª®¬

> 2

1

𝑇 1/2

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

Δ𝑘 (𝐶 )

!2

= 1

𝑇 2

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙 =1

𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 ) × Δ𝑗 (𝐵 ) × Δ𝑘 (𝐶 ) × Δ𝑙 (𝐶 )

There are four cases for the indices 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘, 𝑙 .

Case 1: 𝑖 = 𝑗 ≠ 𝑘 = 𝑙 (𝑇 2 − 𝑇 total terms). In this setting, the expectation can be written as: 

𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 )2 × Δ𝑘 (𝐶 )2 = 𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 )2 × 𝔼 Δ𝑘 (𝐶 )2 ,

since trees 𝑖 and 𝑘 are independent. Substituting in the result of Eq. 5, 

𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 )2 × Δ𝑘 (𝐶 )2 ≤ 𝜎 4 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )2𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 𝑝 ]2𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 ).

Case 2: 𝑖 = 𝑘 ≠ 𝑗 = 𝑙 or 𝑖 = 𝑙 ≠ 𝑗 = 𝑘 (2𝑇 2 − 2𝑇 terms). We can write these terms as 

𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 ) × Δ𝑖 (𝐶 ) × Δ𝑗 (𝐵 ) × Δ𝑗 (𝐶 ) = 𝔼 [Δ𝑖 (𝐵 ) × Δ𝑖 (𝐶 )] 2

with the equality following because trees 𝑖 and 𝑗 are i.i.d. Then applying Cauchy-Schwarz and substituting in the result of Eq. 5, 

𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 ) × Δ𝑖 (𝐶 ) × Δ𝑗 (𝐵 ) × Δ𝑗 (𝐶 ) ≤ 𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 )2 𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐶 )2

≤ 𝜎 4 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )2𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 𝑝 ]2𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 ).

Case 3: 𝑖 = 𝑗 = 𝑘 = 𝑙 (𝑇 terms). By the same argument as above, increment Δ𝑖 (𝐵 ) is zero unless all corner points in V ( 𝐵 ) are in different leaf nodes, and similarly for Δ𝑖 (𝐶 ). By the argument in Lemma A.3, this event is the equivalent to the event that a decision rule separates each pair of interval endpoints for the intervals that define 𝐵 and 𝐶 . Because 𝐵 and 𝐶 are compatible, there is one interval per dimension for both 𝐵 and 𝐶 , but there is double-counting of the intervals on which 𝐵 and 𝐶 agree. Thus overall, by a similar argument as above, 

ℙ[Δ𝑖 (𝐵 )Δ𝑖 (𝐶 ) ≠ 0] ≤ 𝐾 2𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 2𝑝 ] 𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 )

𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 ) ,

and so 𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 )2 Δ𝑖 (𝐶 )2 = 𝔼 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 )2 Δ𝑖 (𝐶 )2 Δ𝑖 (𝐵 )Δ𝑖 (𝐶 ) ≠ 0 ℙ[Δ𝑖 (𝐵 )Δ𝑖 (𝐶 ) ≠ 0]≤ 3𝜎 4 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )2𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 2𝑝 ] 𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 )

𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 ) ,

32 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

where the bound on the expectation follows from the same argument as in Eq. 5; the factor of 3 is due to 𝔼 [𝑋 2𝑌 2] ≤ 3𝔼 [𝑋 2]𝔼 [𝑌 2] for zero-mean Gaussians 𝑋 and 𝑌 without assumptions on their dependence. 

Case 4: All other cases. In this case, there is at least one index that is distinct from the others, and so one of the differences is independent of the others, since it involves a different tree, and the trees are independent. Since each tree increment has mean zero, each of these terms is zero as well. Combining the four cases, we have shown 

𝔼 |Δ𝑔 𝑇 (𝐵 )| 2 |Δ𝑔 𝑇 (𝐶 )| 2

≤ 1

𝑇 2



3(𝑇 2 − 𝑇 ) · 𝜎 4 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )2𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 𝑝 ]2𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 ) + 𝑇 · 3𝜎 4 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )2𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 2𝑝 ] 𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 )

𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 )



≤ 𝜎 4 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )2𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 2𝑝 ]𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 )



3𝑇 2 − 𝑇 𝑇 2 + 3

𝑇 𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 )



≤ 3𝜎 4 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )2𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 2𝑝 ]𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 )



1 + 1

𝑇 𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 )



.

Letting 𝐾 𝑝 := 3𝜎 4 

> 𝜇

(2𝐾 )2𝑝 𝔼 [𝐷 2𝑝 ] completes the proof. □

Let X be a rectangular subset of [0, 1]𝑝 and let 𝐸 be a Banach space with norm ∥·∥ 𝐸 . When 𝐸 = ℝ, this norm is the usual absolute value and we drop the subscript. For a function 𝑓 : X → 𝐸 , we say that 

𝑓 ∈ C 𝑇 (X , 𝐸 ) if there exists a constant 𝐾 𝑝 < ∞ such that for all 𝜆 > 0 and every pair of compatible blocks 𝐵 and 𝐶 ,

ℙ[min { Δ𝑓 (𝐵 ) 𝐸 , Δ𝑓 (𝐶 ) 𝐸 } ≥ 𝜆 ] ≤ 𝐾 𝑝 𝜆 −4𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 )



1 + 1

𝑇 𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 )



.

Applying Chebyshev’s inequality and the fact that min { Δ𝑓 (𝐵 ) 𝐸 , Δ𝑓 (𝐶 ) 𝐸 }4 ≤ Δ𝑓 (𝐵 ) 2 

> 𝐸

Δ𝑓 (𝐶 ) 2

> 𝐸

, to show that 𝑓 ∈ C 𝑇 (X , 𝐸 ) it suffices to show 

𝔼 

h

Δ𝑓 (𝐵 ) 2 

> 𝐸

Δ𝑓 (𝐶 ) 2

> 𝐸

i

≤ 𝐾 𝑝 𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 )



1 + 1

𝑇 𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 )



.

C𝑇 (X , 𝐸 ) is effectively a modified condition C( 2, 4) from Bickel and Wichura (1971), one which allows for a 1/𝑇 term but which is more restrictive in holding for any compatible 𝐵 and 𝐶 , not just those that are adjacent. To state the critical result, for 1 ≤ 𝑞 ≤ 𝑝 , let 

𝑓 (𝑞 ) 

> 𝑥

(𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑞 −1, 𝑥 𝑞 +1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑝 ) := 𝑓 (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑞 −1, 𝑥, 𝑥 𝑞 +1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑝 ).

Equivalently, we could write 𝑓 (𝑞 ) 

> 𝑥

(y) := 𝑓 (y−{ 𝑞 } + 𝑒 𝑞 𝑥 ), where 𝑒 𝑞 is the 𝑞 th standard basis vector in ℝ𝑝 .We can view 𝑓 (𝑞 ) 

> 𝑥

as a function on [0, 1] mapping to the space of functions D𝑝 −1 with the supremum norm ∥·∥ ∞. Then define 

𝑚 𝑞 (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧 )( 𝑓 ) := min { 𝑓 (𝑞 ) 

> 𝑦

− 𝑓 (𝑞 ) 

> 𝑥 ∞

, 𝑓 (𝑞 ) 

> 𝑧

− 𝑓 (𝑞 ) 

> 𝑦 ∞

}

= min {Δ𝑓 (𝑞 ) ([ 𝑥, 𝑦 ]) , Δ𝑓 (𝑞 ) ([ 𝑦, 𝑧 ])} ;

33 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

the second equality represents 𝑚 𝑞 as a comparison of increments of the one-dimensional function 

𝑓 (𝑞 ) . Finally, define 

𝑀 ′′  

> 𝑞

(𝑓 ) := sup  

> 0≤𝑥 ≤𝑦 ≤𝑧 ≤1

𝑚 𝑞 (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧 )( 𝑓 ) and 𝑀 ′′ (𝑓 ) := max   

> 1≤𝑞 ≤𝑝

𝑀 ′′  

> 𝑞

(𝑓 ).

Then, extending Theorem 1 from Bickel and Wichura (1971), we have the following lemma. 

Lemma A.6. Let 𝑞 ∈ [ 𝑝 ] be a dimension, 0 ≤ 𝜒 < 𝜉 ≤ 1, and define X := {x ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 : 𝑥 𝑞 ∈ [ 𝜒, 𝜉 ]} . Then there exists a constant 𝐿 𝑝 < ∞ depending only on 𝑝 and 𝐾 𝑝 such that for all 𝜆 > 0, and for any 𝑓 ∈ C 𝑇 (X , 𝐸 ),

ℙ[𝑀 ′′  

> 𝑞

(𝑓 ) ≥ 𝜆 ] ≤ 𝜆 −4 𝐿 𝑝 𝜈 (X) 2 = 𝜆 −4 𝐿 𝑝 (𝜉 − 𝜒 )2.

Proof. The proof closely follows the structure of the proof of Theorem 1 in Bickel and Wichura (1971), specializing certain aspects (e.g., Lebesgue measure, 𝛽 = 2) while generalizing to cover the additional term scaled by 1/𝑇 and functions which may not vanish on their lower boundary. We proceed by induction on 𝑝 .When 𝑝 = 1, and the blocks 𝐵 and 𝐶 are adjacent the condition 𝑓 ∈ C 𝑇 (X , 𝐸 ) means in fact that 

ℙ[min { Δ𝑓 (𝐵 ) 𝐸 , Δ𝑓 (𝐶 ) 𝐸 } ≥ 𝜆 ] ≤ 𝜆 −4 𝐾 ′

> 1

𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 ),

since in one dimension the term 𝜈 (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 ) = 1 and the 1/𝑇 term can be absorbed into the constant. Since for adjacent 𝐵 and 𝐶 , 𝜈 (𝐵 )𝜈 (𝐶 ) ≤ 14 (𝜈 (𝐵 ) + 𝜈 (𝐶 )) 2, this condition is stronger than C( 2, 4) in Bickel & Wichura’s notation, and the base case then follows from the base case (i) proven in Theorem 1 of their work. That case does not depend on the function vanishing at its lower boundary, which is a condition of their Theorem 1. Before turning to the inductive step, we first claim that for any 𝑝 and any 𝑓 : X → 𝐸 , that 

∥𝑓 ∥∞ ≤ 𝑝𝑀 ′′ (𝑓 ) + max   

> 𝜹 ∈ V ( X)

∥𝑓 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 ,

i.e., any function is bounded by 𝑝 times its maximum increment 𝑀 ′′ plus the maximum of its values at the vertices of the block X. To establish this claim, without any loss of generality we can take 

X = [0, 1]𝑝 , which will simplify the notation. First notice that for any 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 ∈ 𝐸 ,

∥𝑎 ∥𝐸 ≤ min {∥ 𝑎 − 𝑏 ∥𝐸 , ∥𝑐 − 𝑎 ∥𝐸 } + max {∥ 𝑏 ∥𝐸 , ∥𝑐 ∥𝐸 }.

Then, for any 𝜹 ∈ { 0, 1}𝑘 for 1 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑝 , let x𝜹 • denote the point in [0, 1]𝑝 with 𝑥 𝑖 = 𝛿 𝑖 for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘 and with the remaining coordinates identical to those of x. Thus, for example, x11 • and x10 • differ only in coordinate 2. Then for any x ∈ [ 0, 1]𝑝 ,

∥𝑓 (x)∥ 𝐸 ≤ min {∥ 𝑓 (x) − 𝑓 (x0•)∥ 𝐸 , ∥𝑓 (x1•) − 𝑓 (x)∥ 𝐸 } + max {∥ 𝑓 (x0•)∥ 𝐸 , ∥𝑓 (x1•)∥ 𝐸 }≤ 𝑀 ′′  

> 1

(𝑓 ) + max {∥ 𝑓 (x0•)∥ 𝐸 , ∥𝑓 (x1•)∥ 𝐸 }

By the same argument, 

∥𝑓 (x0•)∥ 𝐸 ≤ 𝑀 ′′  

> 2

(𝑓 ) + max {∥ 𝑓 (x00 •)∥ 𝐸 , ∥𝑓 (x01 •)∥ 𝐸 } and 

∥𝑓 (x1•)∥ 𝐸 ≤ 𝑀 ′′  

> 2

(𝑓 ) + max {∥ 𝑓 (x10 •)∥ 𝐸 , ∥𝑓 (x11 •)∥ 𝐸 }.

Substituting these two inequalities into the previous one, we can pull the 𝑀 ′′  

> 2

(𝑓 ) terms out and collapse the maximum, yielding 

∥𝑓 (x)∥ 𝐸 ≤ 𝑀 ′′  

> 1

(𝑓 ) + 𝑀 ′′  

> 2

(𝑓 ) + max {∥ 𝑓 (x00 •)∥ 𝐸 , ∥𝑓 (x01 •)∥ 𝐸 , ∥𝑓 (x10 •)∥ 𝐸 , ∥𝑓 (x11 •)∥ 𝐸 }.

34 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Continuing in this way for all 𝑝 dimensions, we obtain 

∥𝑓 (x)∥ 𝐸 ≤

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> 𝑞 =1

𝑀 ′′  

> 𝑞

(𝑓 ) + max   

> 𝜹 ∈ { 0,1}𝑝

∥𝑓 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 ≤

> 𝑝

∑︁ 

> 𝑞 =1

𝑀 ′′ (𝑓 ) + max   

> 𝜹 ∈ { 0,1}𝑝

∥𝑓 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 ,

which proves the claimed inequality. For the inductive step, we can without loss of generality take 𝑞 = 1. Define functions 𝑔 := 𝑓 (1) 

> 𝑦

− 𝑓 (1)

> 𝑥

and ℎ := 𝑓 (1) 

> 𝑧

− 𝑓 (1) 

> 𝑦

(no relation to BART or tree functions). We have by definition of 𝑚 1 and application of the above inequality that for any (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧 ) with 𝜒 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑦 ≤ 𝑧 ≤ 𝜉 ,

𝑚 1 (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧 )( 𝑓 ) = min {∥ 𝑔 ∥∞, ∥ℎ∥∞}≤ min {( 𝑝 − 1)𝑀 ′′ (𝑔 ) + max    

> 𝜹 ∈ V ( X −1)

∥𝑔 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 , (𝑝 − 1)𝑀 ′′ (ℎ) + max    

> 𝜹 ∈ V ( X −1)

∥ℎ(𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 }≤ min {( 𝑝 − 1) max {𝑀 ′′ (𝑔 ), 𝑀 ′′ (ℎ)} + max    

> 𝜹 ∈ V ( X −1)

∥𝑔 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 ,

(𝑝 − 1) max {𝑀 ′′ (𝑔 ), 𝑀 ′′ (ℎ)} + max    

> 𝜹 ∈ V ( X −1)

∥ℎ(𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 }

= (𝑝 − 1) max {𝑀 ′′ (𝑔 ), 𝑀 ′′ (ℎ)} + min { max    

> 𝜹 ∈ V ( X −1)

∥𝑔 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 , max    

> 𝜹 ∈ V ( X −1)

∥ℎ(𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 }≤ ( 𝑝 − 1) max {𝑀 ′′ (𝑔 ), 𝑀 ′′ (ℎ)} + max      

> 𝜹 ,𝜹 ′∈ V ( X −1)

min {∥ 𝑔 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 , ∥ℎ(𝜹 ′)∥ 𝐸 },

where X−1 is X with the 𝑞 = 1 coordinate removed. We will bound each term on the right-hand side separately. To bound 𝑀 ′′ (𝑔 ), notice that for any block 𝐵 ′ in X−1, Δ𝑔 (𝐵 ′) = Δ𝑓 (𝐵 ), where 𝐵 = [𝑥, 𝑦 ] × 𝐵 ′. Thus 

𝑔 ∈ C 𝑇 in 𝑝 − 1 dimensions, with 𝜈 scaled by 𝑦 − 𝑥 in X−1. By the inductive hypothesis (see Bickel and Wichura, 1971), we therefore have for each remaining coordinate 𝑟 that 

ℙ[𝑀 ′′  

> 𝑟

(𝑔 ) ≥ 𝜆 ] ≤ 𝐿 𝑝 −1 𝜆 −4 ( 𝑦 − 𝑥 )2.

A union bound over coordinates then yields 

ℙ[𝑀 ′′ (𝑔 ) ≥ 𝜆 ] ≤ ( 𝑝 − 1)𝐿 𝑝 −1 𝜆 −4 ( 𝑦 − 𝑥 )2.

The same inequality follows for 𝑀 ′′ (ℎ), with 𝑧 − 𝑦 in place of 𝑦 − 𝑥 . Thus by a union bound, 

ℙ[( 𝑝 − 1) max {𝑀 ′′ (𝑔 ), 𝑀 ′′ (ℎ)} ≥ 𝜆 ]≤ ℙ[( 𝑝 − 1)𝑀 ′′ (𝑔 ) ≥ 𝜆 ] + ℙ[( 𝑝 − 1)𝑀 ′′ (ℎ) ≥ 𝜆 ]≤ 𝐿 𝑝 −1 (𝑝 − 1)5 𝜆 −4 (𝑧 − 𝑥 )2.

By a similar argument, we can bound min {∥ 𝑔 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 , ∥ℎ(𝜹 ′)∥ 𝐸 } for any 𝜹 , 𝜹 ′ ∈ V (X −1), and then multiply this bound by 22(𝑝 −1) to obtain a bound on max 𝜹 ,𝜹 ′ ∈ V ( X −1 ) min {∥ 𝑔 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 , ∥ℎ(𝜹 ′)∥ 𝐸 }. But by the original hypothesis that 𝑓 ∈ C 𝑇 (X , 𝐸 ), for any 𝜹 , 𝜹 ′,

ℙ[min {∥ 𝑔 (𝜹 )∥ 𝐸 , ∥ℎ(𝜹 ′)∥ 𝐸 } ≥ 𝜆 ] ≤ 𝐾 𝑝 𝜆 −4 (𝑧 − 𝑦 )( 𝑦 − 𝑥 )



1 + 1

𝑇 



≤ 2𝐾 𝑝 𝜆 −4 (𝑧 − 𝑥 )2,

since the intervals [𝑥, 𝑦 ] and [ 𝑦, 𝑧 ] do not overlap. Since for any random variables 𝑈 and 𝑉 , ℙ[𝑈 +𝑉 ≥ 𝜆 ] ≤ ℙ[𝑈 ≥ 𝜆 /2] + ℙ[𝑉 ≥ 𝜆 /2], we have established 

ℙ[𝑚 1 (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧 )( 𝑓 ) ≥ 𝜆 ] ≤ 24 · ( 𝐿 𝑝 −1 (𝑝 − 1)5 + 22𝑝 𝐾 𝑝 )𝜆 −4 (𝑧 − 𝑥 )2.

35 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

But this in fact means that 𝑓 (1) meets the hypotheses of the base case 𝑝 = 1 as a univariate (𝐸 ′)-valued process, as discussed above. Thus the conclusion for the inductive step follows by letting  

> 𝐿 𝑝

:= 𝐾 1 (2, 4)24 · ( 𝐿 𝑝 −1 (𝑝 − 1)5 + 22𝑝 𝐾 𝑝 ), where 𝐾 1 (2, 4) is the universal constant from the univariate case in Bickel and Wichura (1971). □

We can now prove the main convergence result, Theorem 3.1. 

Proof of Theorem 3.1. We apply the corollary to Theorem 2 of Bickel and Wichura (1971), which requires convergence of the finite-dimensional distributions, existence of a continuous version of the limiting process, and a tightness condition, specifically the convergence of a certain modulus to zero. Lemma 3.1 establishes f.d.d. convergence. Existence of a sample-continuous version of the limiting GP is given by the Kolmogorov continuity theorem and Lemma A.2. The argument of Theorem 3 of Bickel and Wichura (1971) then establishes the tightness condition, with our Lemma A.6 replacing their Theorem 1. The only additional condition for Theorem 3 to apply is that 𝑔 𝑇 ∈ C 𝑇 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 , ℝ) with a constant uniform in 𝑇 . This is established by Lemma A.5, whose Lipschitz hypothesis is satisfied by Lemma A.2 under the assumptions of this theorem. □

36 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

## B Random tree features proofs 

To prove Theorem 4.1, we will need to prove a slight generalization of Theorem 6 of Rudi and Rosasco (2017) (herein RR17), which is sufficient along with the argument below in Appendix B.2 to establish Theorem 4.1. In particular, RR17 considers the setting in which each random feature maps to a single function; this means that a feature’s contribution to the kernel operator is rank-1. In contrast, for BART, each random tree produces 2𝐷 total leaf indicators, and so each feature’s contribution to the kernel operator is rank-2𝐷 , where 𝐷 is random. In the first subsection, we carry out this generalization, culminating in Theorem B.1. The second subsection then specializes the result to our case and proves Theorem 4.1. 

B.1 Generalizing RR17 

First, we need to set up some additional notation and establish some basic properties. Then we will generalize certain intermediate results from RR17, which will be used in the proof of the main result. Throughout we use 𝔼 𝑋 and ∥·∥ 𝑋 to denote the expectation and 𝐿 2 norm with respect to the distribution of the covariates 𝑋 . Expectations without a subscript average over all relevant random quantities. We use ∥·∥ 𝑜𝑝 to denote the operator norm for linear operators on 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ), where the input and output norms are ∥·∥ 𝑋 .To start, defined a rescaled Σ by ΣBART = 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

Σ. Then let Σ𝜔 : 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ) → 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ) represent the one-tree approximation of Σ, defined as 

Σ𝜔 :=∑︁ 

> l∈ L

𝜓 l ⊗ 𝜓 l,

where (Σ𝑤 𝑔 )( 𝑥 ) = Íl∈ L 𝜓 l (𝑥 )𝔼 𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑋 )𝑔 (𝑋 )] , and 𝜓 l is the indicator function for leaf l of the tree defined by 𝜔 . Then we have Σ = 𝔼 𝜔 [Σ𝜔 ], i.e., averaging over the distribution of the random features. Because we have assumed 𝑔 0 ∈ H BART , the source condition is satisfied, where for ˜𝑔 ∈ 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ),

𝑔 0 (𝑥 ) = (Σ1/2 ˜𝑔 )( 𝑥 ) a.s. We will define 𝑅 as the 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ) norm of the function ˜𝑔 (i.e., 𝑅 := ∥ ˜𝑔 ∥𝑋 ). We define additional operators analogously to RR17. As in RR17, these operators are implicitly conditional on a particular draw of the random features 𝜔 . As in the main text, let 𝑀 = Í𝑇 𝑗 =1 2𝐷 𝑗 be the total number of leaf nodes across the 𝑇 trees, which depends on 𝜔 as well. 

• 𝑆 𝑇 : 𝑅 𝑀 → 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ), (𝑆 𝑇 𝛽 )( x) = 𝜙 𝑇 (x)⊤ 𝛽 

• 𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑇

: 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ) → 𝑅 𝑀 , (𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑇

𝑓 )𝑗 = 𝔼 𝑋 [𝑓 (𝑋 )𝜙 𝑇,𝑗 (𝑋 )] 

• Σ𝑇 : 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ) → 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ), (Σ𝑇 𝑓 )( z) = 𝔼 𝑋 [𝜙 𝑇 (𝑋 )⊤𝜙 𝑇 (z)𝑓 (𝑋 )] , i.e., Σ𝑇 = 𝑇 −1 Í𝑇 𝑗 =1 Σ𝜔 𝑗 

• 𝐶 𝑇 : 𝑅 𝑀 → 𝑅 𝑀 , 𝐶 𝑇 (z) = 𝔼 𝑋 [𝜙 𝑇 (𝑋 )𝜙 𝑇 (𝑋 )⊤]z

We define ˆ𝑆 𝑇 , ˆ𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑇

, and ˆ𝐶 𝑇 as the empirical versions of the above operators, i.e., with the expectation taken with respect to the empirical distribution of the covariates 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋 𝑛 .Remark 8 of RR17 carries over, stating that (1) Σ and Σ𝑇 are trace class (2) Σ𝑇 = 𝑆 𝑇 𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑇

, 𝐶 𝑇 = 𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑇

𝑆 𝑇 , and ˆ𝐶 𝑇 = ˆ𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑇

ˆ𝑆 𝑇 .(3) Σ, Σ𝑇 , 𝐶 𝑇 , and ˆ𝐶 𝑇 are self-adjoint and positive operators, with spectrum in [0, 1].37 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

We can also establish some basic properties of the kernel operators. Intuitively, these are sufficient for the random tree features to behave like the continuous, univariate features studied in RR17. 

Lemma B.1. Σ, Σ𝑇 , and Σ𝜔 have the following properties: 1. Σ − Σ𝑇 is an average of 𝑇 i.i.d., zero-mean, self-adjoint random operators on 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ).2. Uniform operator bound: ∥Σ𝜔 ∥𝑜𝑝 ≤ 1 for all 𝜔 

3. Uniform trace bound: Tr (Σ𝜔 ) =≤ 1

4. Sub-idempotency: Σ2 

> 𝜔

≤ Σ𝜔 

Proof. We will prove each property in turn. 

Property 1. We can re-write Σ − Σ𝑇 as 

Σ − Σ𝑇 = 1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

(Σ − Σ𝜔 𝑗 ).

Since 𝜔 1, . . . , 𝜔 𝑇 are i.i.d., Σ − Σ𝜔 𝑗 are also i.i.d. By definition, Σ = 𝔼 𝜔 [Σ𝜔 ], and 𝔼 [Σ − Σ𝑇 ] = Σ − 𝔼 𝜔 [Σ𝜔 ] = 0.Finally, we can show the self-adjointness of Σ𝜔 :

⟨Σ𝜔 𝑓 , 𝑔 ⟩ := 𝔼 𝑋 [( Σ𝑤 𝑓 )( 𝑋 )𝑔 (𝑋 )] 

= 𝔼 𝑋 

" ∑︁ 

> l

𝜓 l (𝑋 )𝔼 𝑍 ∼𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑍 )𝑓 (𝑍 )] 

!

𝑔 (𝑋 )

#

=∑︁ 

> l

𝔼 𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑋 )𝑓 (𝑋 )] 𝔼 𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑋 )𝑔 (𝑋 )] 

= 𝔼 𝑋 

" ∑︁ 

> l

𝜓 l (𝑋 )𝔼 𝑍 ∼𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑍 )𝑔 (𝑍 )] 

!

𝑓 (𝑋 )

#

= ⟨𝑓 , Σ𝜔 𝑔 ⟩.

Since Σ and Σ𝑇 are linear combinations of self-adjoint operators, Σ − Σ𝑇 is self-adjoint as a result. 

Property 2. We can bound the operator norm of Σ𝜔 by applying Cauchy-Schwarz. More concretely, for any 𝑔 ∈ 𝐿 2 (𝑋 ),

∥Σ𝜔 𝑔 ∥2 

> 𝑋

=∑︁ 

> l

𝜓 l (𝑋 )𝔼 𝑍 ∼𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑍 )𝑔 (𝑍 )] 

> 2
> 𝑋

=∑︁ 

> l

𝔼 𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑋 )] ( 𝔼 𝑍 ∼𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑍 )𝑔 (𝑍 )]) 2

≤∑︁ 

> l

𝔼 𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑋 )] 𝔼 𝑍 ∼𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑍 )2]𝔼 𝑍 ∼𝑋 [𝑔 (𝑍 )2]

= ∥𝑔 ∥2

> 𝑋

∑︁ l

𝔼 𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑋 )] 2

≤ ∥ 𝑔 ∥2

> 𝑋

∑︁ l

𝔼 𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑋 )] 

= ∥𝑔 ∥2

> 𝑋

38 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

where the second line follows from the fact that the 𝜓 l are orthogonal, the third line is Cauchy-Schwarz, and the penultimate lin follows from 𝔼 𝑋 [𝜓 l (𝑋 )] ≤ 1 for all l. Taking the square root of both sides yields ∥Σ𝜔 ∥𝑜𝑝 ≤ 1.

Property 3. We compute the trace of Σ𝜔 using the linearity of the trace: Tr (Σ𝜔 ) =∑︁ 

> l

Tr (𝜓 l ⊗ 𝜓 l)

=∑︁ 

> l

∥𝜓 l ∥2

> 𝑋

= 1,

which follows directly from the fact that for l ∈ L , 𝜓 l can only take on a value of 1 for one l.

Property 4. Sub-idempotency follows from applying the uniform operator bound (i.e., property 2): 

Σ2 

> 𝜔

≤ ∥ Σ𝜔 ∥𝑜𝑝 Σ𝜔 ≤ Σ𝜔 . □

Finally, we define a generalized notion of the maximum random features dimension as 

F∞ (𝜆 ) := sup 

> 𝜔

Tr 



Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 



, where Σ𝜆 = Σ + 𝜆𝐼. 

F∞ (𝜆 ) is bounded by 1/𝜆 , by property 3 in Lemma B.1. Furthermore, we define 

N ( 𝜆 ) := Tr 



Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ



= 𝔼 𝜔 [Tr 



Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 



].

B.1.1 Generalized result and proof approach 

With these preliminaries, out of the way, now state a generalization of Theorem 6 in RR17 for our setting. We maintain the use of 𝜅 , the bound on the random features, which here equals 1, to aid in comparison with RR17 as well as future generalizations. So, e.g., we have F∞ (𝜆 ) ≤ 𝜅 2/𝜆 , since 𝜅 := 1

here, but the same general bound is used by RR17, and would hold here for an operator Σ bounded by 

𝜅 2 rather than 1. 

Theorem B.1 (Alternative RR17 Theorem 6) . For ridge penalty 0 < 𝜆 ≤ 34 ∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 , and for all 𝛿 ∈ ( 0, 1), if 

𝑇 ≥ 18 (𝑞 0 + F ∞ (𝜆 )) log 

 84 𝜅 2

𝜆𝛿 



(6) 

and 

𝑛 ≥ 18 (2 + 𝜅 2/𝜆 ) log 

 28 𝜅 2

𝜆𝛿 



, (7) 

where 𝑞 0 := 2(2 + 𝜅 2/∥ Σ∥𝑜𝑝 + 𝜅 2), then with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 ,

ˆ𝑔 𝜆,𝑇,𝑛 − 𝑔 0 𝑋 ≤ 8 (𝐵 + 2𝑅𝜅 )𝜅 

√𝜆𝑛 +√︂ (𝜎 + 𝑅𝜅 )2N ( 𝜆 )

𝑛 

!

log 

 14 

𝛿 



+ 3𝑅 √𝜆, (8) 

where 𝐵 and 𝜎 are determined by the sub-exponential condition on 𝑌 , i.e., for 𝔼 [| 𝑌 |𝑐 | 𝑋 ] ≤ 12 𝑐 !𝜎 2 𝐵 𝑐 −2, for all 𝑐 ≥ 2.

39 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

The proof of Theorem 6 of RR17 relies on a decomposition of the excess risk, which we restate here using the notation and operators defined above. The three terms below correspond to sample error, computational error, and approximation error, respectively. Note that S( 𝜆, 𝑇, 𝑛 ), C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ), and 𝛽 are random quantities that depend on the drawn set of random features. 

Theorem B.2. For any 𝜆 > 0 and 𝑇 ∈ ℕ,

ˆ𝑔 𝜆,𝑇,𝑛 − 𝑔 0 𝑋 ≤ 𝛽 (S( 𝜆, 𝑇, 𝑛 ) + C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ) + 𝑅 √𝜆 ),

where 

S( 𝜆, 𝑇, 𝑛 ) := 𝐶 −1/2 

> 𝑇,𝜆

( ˆ𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑇

ˆ𝑦 − 𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑇

𝑔 0) 𝑋 + 𝑅 𝐶 −1/2 

> 𝑇,𝜆

(𝐶 𝑇 − ˆ𝐶 𝑇 ) 𝑜𝑝 ,

with ˆ𝑦 = 𝑛 −1/2 (𝑌 1, . . . , 𝑌 𝑛 ),

C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ) := 𝑅 √𝜆 Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

(Σ − Σ𝑇 )Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

, and 

𝛽 := max {1, (1 − 𝛽 1)−1} max {1, (1 − 𝛽 2)−1/2},

with 𝛽 1 := 𝜍 max (𝐶 −1/2 

> 𝑇,𝜆

(𝐶 𝑇 − ˆ𝐶 𝑇 )) and 𝛽 2 := 𝜍 max (Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

(Σ − Σ𝑇 )Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

), where 𝜍 max denotes the maximum eigenvalue. Proof. Theorem B.2 follows from an identical argument to the proof of Theorem 4 in RR17, which proceeds by adding and subtracting terms to ˆ𝑔 𝜆,𝑇,𝑛 − 𝑔 0, grouping them, and applying the triangle inequality. Each new term is then bounded by Lemmas 2–5 in RR17. These lemmas go through identi-cally, generally because each involves purely algebraic manipulations, and because of the properties shown above in Lemma B.1. In RR17, Lemmas 1 and 2 (which relies on Lemma 1) involve reexpressing an integral, but this reexpression is equally valid when the features are multivariate. The fact that the dimension of the features Ψ (x) is also random does not affect the argument, which in RR17 is implicitly made pointwise within a single 𝜔 . □

From here, we will adapt the arguments in RR17 to bound each term in Theorem B.2, before combining them to prove Theorem B.1. While most of the key results from RR17 can be generalized to our operator setting, several pieces require adaptation. The first is the adaptive dimension concentration result (Proposition 10), which is used to bound the sampling error S. The second is re-proving the bound on C.

B.1.2 Bernstein bound lemma 

The following lemma will be repeatedly used in bounding each term in Theorem B.2. 

Lemma B.2. Suppose 0 < 𝜆 ≤ ∥ Σ∥𝑜𝑝 . Then for 𝛿 ∈ ( 0, 1], with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 ,

Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

(Σ − Σ𝑇 )Σ−1/2  

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

≤

2(F ∞ (𝜆 ) + 1) log 

 8𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



3𝑇 +

vt

2F∞ (𝜆 ) log 

 8𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



𝑇 . (9) 

Proof. Define 𝐴 := Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

ΣΣ −1/2 

> 𝜆

and 𝐵 𝑗 := Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

, so that 𝔼 [𝐵 𝑗 ] = 𝐴 , and let 𝑋 𝑗 := 𝐴 − 𝐵 𝑗 .Expanding Σ𝑇 in terms of Σ𝜔 ,

Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

(Σ − Σ𝑇 )Σ−1/2  

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

= 1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑋 𝑗 

> 𝑜𝑝

.

40 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Note that 𝑋 𝑗 is an i.i.d., self-adjoint, zero-mean random operator. Then, for all 𝑗 ,

𝑋 𝑗 𝑜𝑝 ≤ ∥ 𝐴 ∥𝑜𝑝 + 𝐵 𝑗 𝑜𝑝 ≤ F ∞ (𝜆 ) + 1,

where the inequality follows from the fact that 𝐵 𝑗 𝑜𝑝 = Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 Σ−1/2  

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

≤ Tr 



Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 



≤ F ∞ (𝜆 ) by the cyclic property of the trace and the definition of F∞ (𝜆 ), and ∥ 𝐴 ∥𝑜𝑝 = Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

ΣΣ −1/2  

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

≤ 1 since 

Σ𝜆 = Σ + 𝜆𝐼 .The second moment of 𝑋 𝑗 is also bounded by 

𝔼 𝜔 [𝑋 2 

> 𝑗

] = 𝐴 2 − 𝐴 𝔼 𝜔 [𝐵 𝑗 ] − 𝔼 𝜔 [𝐵 𝑗 ] 𝐴 + 𝔼 𝜔 [𝐵 2 

> 𝑗

]

= 𝔼 𝜔 [𝐵 2 

> 𝑗

] − 𝐴 2

≤ 𝔼 𝜔 [𝐵 2 

> 𝑗

]≤ 𝔼 𝜔 [F ∞ (𝜆 )𝐵 𝑗 ] = F∞ (𝜆 ) 𝐴, 

where the second to last line follows because 𝐴 is positive semidefinite, and the last line follows from spectral calculus: if ∥ 𝐴 ∥𝑜𝑝 ≤ 𝑐 , then 𝐴 2 ≤ 𝑐𝐴 in the Loewner order, which is preserved by expectations. As such, we have shown that the second moment of 𝑋 𝑗 is bounded, and the operator norm is also bounded. We can then apply a two-sided Bernstein bound for operators, which is RR17, Proposition 3 using 𝛿 0 = 𝛿 /2. Substituting into that bound yields 

1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑋 𝑗 

> 𝑜𝑝

≤ 2(F ∞ (𝜆 ) + 1)𝛽 

3𝑇 +√︂ 2F∞ (𝜆 )𝛽 𝑇 ,

with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 , where 𝛽 := log 

 2 Tr ( 𝐴 )∥ 𝐴 ∥𝑜𝑝 𝛿 0



. Since 𝜆 ≤ ∥ Σ∥𝑜𝑝 ,

∥ 𝐴 ∥𝑜𝑝 = ∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 

∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 + 𝜆 ≥ 12 and Tr ( 𝐴 ) ≤ Tr (Σ)

𝜆 ≤ 𝜅 2

𝜆 .

Therefore, 

𝛽 = log 2 Tr ( 𝐴 )∥ 𝐴 ∥𝑜𝑝 𝛿 0

!

≤ log 

 4𝜅 2

𝜆𝛿 0



= log 

 8𝜅 2

𝜆𝛿 



,

and substituting this upper bound for 𝛽 gives the result. □

B.1.3 Concentration of effective dimension 

We will next adapt the effective dimension concentration result from RR17 (Proposition 10). To start, define N𝑇 (𝜆 ) := Tr 



Σ𝑇 Σ−1

> 𝑇,𝜆



as the empirical effective dimension, computed using only the finite subsample of 𝑇 .

Lemma B.3. For 𝛿 ∈ ( 0, 1], 𝜆 ≤ ∥ Σ∥𝑜𝑝 , and 𝑇 ≥ ( 4 + 18 F∞ (𝜆 )) log 

 12 𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



, with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 ,

|N 𝑇 (𝜆 ) − N ( 𝜆 )| ≤ 1.55 N ( 𝜆 ).

41 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Proof. The proof structure follows almost identically to RR17’s original derivation, with the key extension being that we must show that the operator analogue to the original objects are also well-behaved (i.e., finite mean/variance and boundedness), allowing us to apply Bernstein’s inequality. To start, following RR17 Proposition 7, which is a purely operator-theoretic result, we write the difference between N𝑇 (𝜆 ) and N ( 𝜆 ) as 

|N 𝑇 (𝜆 ) − N ( 𝜆 )| ≤ 𝑑 (𝜆 )2

1 − 𝑐 (𝜆 ) + 𝜆𝑒 (𝜆 ),

where we define ˜𝐵 := Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

(Σ−Σ𝑇 )Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

, and 𝑐 (𝜆 ) = 𝜍 max ( ˜𝐵 ), 𝑑 (𝜆 ) = ˜𝐵 𝐻𝑆 , and 𝑒 (𝜆 ) = Tr 



Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

˜𝐵 Σ−1/2

> 𝜆



.We will now bound each piece: 𝑐 (𝜆 ), 𝜆𝑒 (𝜆 ), and 𝑑 (𝜆 ).

Bounding 𝑐 (𝜆 ). Although Lemma B.2 gives a two-sided norm bound, here we need only to bound the largest eigenvalue. Applying the one-sided Bernstein argument from its proof, we find with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 /3 that 

𝑐 (𝜆 ) ≤ 

2 log 

 12 𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



3𝑇 +

vt

2F∞ (𝜆 ) log 

 12 𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



𝑇 .

Bounding 𝜆𝑒 (𝜆 ). To bound 𝜆𝑒 (𝜆 ), we first re-write 𝑒 (𝜆 ) as 

𝑒 (𝜆 ) = Tr 



Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

˜𝐵 Σ−1/2

> 𝜆



= Tr 



Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

(Σ − Σ𝑇 )Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

Σ−1/2

> 𝜆



= Tr 



Σ−1 

> 𝜆

(Σ − Σ𝑇 )Σ−1

> 𝜆



= Tr 



Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ



− Tr 



Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝑇 



= Tr 



Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ



− 1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

Tr 



Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 



Define 𝜂 𝑗 = Tr 



𝜆 Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 



, which is i.i.d., as the random trees are i.i.d. The random variable 𝜂 𝑗 is bounded, with finite mean and variance. In particular, boundedness follows from 

|𝜂 𝑗 | = Tr 



𝜆 Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 



=(𝑎 ) 𝜆 Tr 



Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 



≤(𝑏 ) 𝜆 Σ−1  

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

· Tr 



Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 



≤(𝑐 ) F∞ (𝜆 ).

Step (a) follows from Σ−1 

> 𝜆

being self-adjoint, (b) follows from positivity of Σ−1 

> 𝜆

and the operator inequality in the Loewner order Σ−1 

> 𝜆

⪯ Σ−1  

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

𝐼 , and (c) follows from 𝜆 Σ−1  

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

≤ 1.42 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Furthermore, by linearity of the trace operator, 

𝔼 𝜔 [𝜂 𝑗 ] = 𝔼 𝜔 [Tr 



𝜆 Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 



]

= 𝜆 Tr 



Σ−2 

> 𝜆

𝔼 𝜔 [Σ𝜔 𝑗 ]



= 𝜆 Tr 



Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ



≤ 𝜆 Σ−1  

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

Tr 



Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ



= 𝜆 Σ−1 

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

N ( 𝜆 )≤ N ( 𝜆 ).

This implies 

|𝜂 𝑗 − 𝔼 [𝜂 𝑗 ]| ≤ F ∞ (𝜆 ) + N ( 𝜆 ) ≤ 2F∞ (𝜆 ).

The uncentered second moment (and thus the centered moment too) can then be directly bounded as 

𝔼 [( 𝜂 𝑗 − 𝔼 [𝜂 𝑗 ]) 2] ≤ 𝔼 𝜔 [𝜂 2 

> 𝑗

] ≤  sup |𝜂 𝑗 | 𝔼 𝜔 (𝜂 𝑗 ) ≤ F ∞ (𝜆 )N ( 𝜆 ).

Then, 𝜆𝑒 (𝜆 ) can be written as deviations of the sample mean of random variable 𝜂 𝑗 ,

𝜆𝑒 (𝜆 ) = 𝜆 Tr 



Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ



− 𝜆 · 1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

Tr 



Σ−2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 



= 𝔼 𝜔 [𝜂 𝑗 ] − 1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝜂 𝑗 ,

and we can apply Bernstein’s inequality for sum of random variables (RR17, Proposition 1) to bound 

𝜆𝑒 (𝜆 ). More specifically, with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 /3,

𝜆 |𝑒 (𝜆 )| ≤ 4F∞ (𝜆 ) log (6/𝛿 )

3𝑇 +√︂ 2F∞ (𝜆 )N ( 𝜆 ) log (6/𝛿 )

𝑇 .

Bounding 𝑑 (𝜆 ). Finally, we bound 𝑑 (𝜆 ). Let 𝐴 𝑗 := Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

. Since 𝐴 𝑗 is positive semidefinite and 

𝐴 𝑗 𝑜𝑝 ≤ Tr  𝐴 𝑗 

 ≤ 𝐹 ∞ (𝜆 ), we have 𝐴 2 

> 𝑗

≤ 𝐴 𝑗 𝑜𝑝 𝐴 𝑗 ≤ F ∞ (𝜆 ) 𝐴 𝑗 in the Loewner order. This means 

𝐴 𝑗 2 

> 𝐻𝑆

≤ F ∞ (𝜆 ) Tr  𝐴 𝑗 

 ≤ F ∞ (𝜆 )2.

Furthermore, this quantity has finite variance: 

𝔼 𝜔 

h

𝐴 𝑗 2

> 𝐻𝑆

i

≤ F ∞ (𝜆 )𝔼 𝜔 

h

Tr 



Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 𝑗 Σ−1/2

> 𝜆

i 

= F∞ (𝜆 )N ( 𝜆 ).

As above, this implies bounds on the centered terms: 

𝐴 𝑗 − 𝔼 [𝐴 𝑗 ] 𝐻𝑆 ≤ 2F∞ (𝜆 ), and 𝔼 𝜔 

h

𝐴 𝑗 − 𝔼 [𝐴 𝑗 ] 2

> 𝐻𝑆

i

≤ F ∞ (𝜆 )N ( 𝜆 ).

43 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

For 𝑝 ≥ 2, the preceding bounds imply 

𝔼  𝐴 𝑗 − 𝔼 [𝐴 𝑗 ] 𝑝 𝐻𝑆 

 ≤ ( 2F∞ (𝜆 )) 𝑝 −2 F∞ (𝜆 )N ( 𝜆 ) ≤ 12 𝑝 ! (2F∞ (𝜆 )N ( 𝜆 )) ( 2F∞ (𝜆 )) 𝑝 −2 .

Thus the moment condition of RR17 Proposition 2 holds with 𝜎 2 = 2F∞ (𝜆 )N ( 𝜆 ) and 𝑀 = 2F∞ (𝜆 ).Then, applying Bernstein’s inequality for sum of random vectors (i.e., RR17’s Proposition 2), with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 /3,

𝑑 (𝜆 ) ≤ 4F∞ (𝜆 ) log (6/𝛿 )

𝑇 +√︂ 4F∞ (𝜆 )N ( 𝜆 ) log (6/𝛿 )

𝑇 .

Now let 𝑏 := log 

 12 𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



and 𝑞 := 4F∞ (𝜆 )𝑏  

> 3𝑇

. Since 𝜆 ≤ ∥ Σ∥𝑜𝑝 ≤ 𝜅 2, we have log (6/𝛿 ) ≤ 𝑏 . Moreover, the assumed lower bound on 𝑇 gives 𝑞 ≤ 227 and 𝑐 (𝜆 ) ≤ 13 . Finally, 

N ( 𝜆 ) ≥ Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ 𝑜𝑝 = ∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 

∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 + 𝜆 ≥ 12.

On the intersection of the three concentration events, which has probability at least 1 − 𝛿 by a union bound, the preceding bound on N ( 𝜆 ) implies 

𝜆 |𝑒 (𝜆 )| ≤ 𝑞 +√︂ 3𝑞 N ( 𝜆 )

2 , 𝑑 (𝜆 ) ≤ 3𝑞 +√︁ 3𝑞 N ( 𝜆 ).

Since 𝑒 (𝜆 ) ≤ | 𝑒 (𝜆 )| , substituting these inequalities yields 

|N 𝑇 (𝜆 ) − N ( 𝜆 )| N ( 𝜆 ) ≤ 𝑞 

N ( 𝜆 ) +√︄ 3𝑞 

2N ( 𝜆 ) +



3𝑞 /√︁ N ( 𝜆 ) + √︁ 3𝑞 

2

1 − 𝑐 (𝜆 ) < 1.55 ,

as claimed. □

B.1.4 Bounding S( 𝜆, 𝑇, 𝑛 )

Lemma 7 in RR17, which relies on their Lemma 6, establishes the following result once recast in our notation, and once an algebra error in the definition of their ¯𝜎 is corrected. 

Lemma B.4 (Corrected RR17 Lemma 7) . Let 𝛿 ∈ ( 0, 1/3] and 𝑛 ∈ ℕ; then if 𝑇 ≥ ( 4+18 F∞ (𝜆 )) log 

 12 𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



,with ( 𝜔 -) probability at least 1 − 3𝛿 ,

S( 𝜆, 𝑇, 𝑛 ) ≤ 4 (𝐵 + 2𝑅𝜅 )𝜅 𝑛 √𝜆 +√︂ (𝜎 + 𝑅𝜅 )2N ( 𝜆 )

𝑛 

!

log 2

𝛿 .

Proof. The proof proceeds identically to the proof of Lemma 7, with the operators implicitly defined conditional on 𝜔 , and with the updated Lemma B.3. A few small errors in the original proof (incorrectly substituting 𝜎 + 2√𝑅𝜅 and applying the N𝑇 (𝜆 ) bound incorrectly) do not affect the logical flow of the argument. □

44 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

B.1.5 Bounding C( 𝜆, 𝑇 )

We will now bound C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ). Usefully, C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ) = 𝑅 √𝜆 Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆

(Σ − Σ𝑇 )Σ−1/2 

> 𝜆 𝑜𝑝

, and we can directly apply Lemma B.2 to recover an identical probability bound as in RR17, Lemma 8 for the special case of 

𝑟 = 1/2, as follows. 

Lemma B.5. Under the assumptions of Lemma B.2, with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 ,

C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ) ≤ 𝑅 √𝜆 

©«

2(F ∞ (𝜆 ) + 1) log 

 8𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



3𝑇 +

vt

2F∞ (𝜆 ) log 

 8𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



𝑇 

ª®®®¬

.

When 𝑇 ≥ ( 4 + 18 F∞ (𝜆 )) log 

 8𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



, we can simplify the upper bound to 

C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ) ≤ 𝑅 √𝜆 

vt

4F∞ (𝜆 ) log 

 8𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



𝑇 = 2𝑅 

vt

𝜆 F∞ (𝜆 ) log 

 8𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



𝑇 .

B.1.6 Stability 𝛽 

Lemma B.6. Let 𝛿 ∈ ( 0, 1/3]. Then, with probability at least 1 − 3𝛿 , 𝛽 < 2 when 0 < 𝜆 ≤ 34 ∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 , and 

𝑛 ≥ 18 



2 + 𝜅 2

𝜆 



log 

 4𝜅 2

𝜆𝛿 



,𝑇 ≥ 18 (2 + F ∞ (𝜆 )) log 

 4𝜅 2

𝜆𝛿 



∨ 32 𝜅 2

∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 

+ 𝜅 2

!

log (2/𝛿 )

Proof. The proof proceeds identically to the proof of Lemma 10 in RR17, bounding 𝛽 in probability by first bounding 𝛽 1 and 𝛽 2. In bounding 𝛽 1, the operators are implicitly defined conditional on 𝜔 ,and the bound goes through. For 𝛽 2, write the deviation as an average of 𝑋 𝑗 = 𝐴 − 𝐵 𝑗 , as in the proof of Lemma B.2. The one-sided argument used to bound 𝑐 (𝜆 ) in Lemma B.3 gives 𝜍 max (𝑋 𝑗 ) ≤ 1 and 

𝔼 [𝑋 2 

> 𝑗

] ⪯ F ∞ (𝜆 ) 𝐴 . Applying the one-sided operator Bernstein inequality therefore gives the required bound on 𝛽 2. The two bounds are combined identically, yielding the stated result. □

B.1.7 Proof of Theorem B.1 

We can now derive a generalized generalization bound. 

Proof. From Theorem B.2, we have the following decomposition: 

ˆ𝑔 𝜆,𝑇,𝑛 − 𝑔 0 𝑋 ≤ 𝛽 



S( 𝜆, 𝑇, 𝑛 ) + C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ) + 𝑅 √𝜆 



.

We can now apply the lemmas derived to bound each piece in probability. 

Bounding 𝛽 . Let 𝜏 := 𝛿 /7. When the following conditions hold, 

• (c1) 0 < 𝜆 ≤ 34 ∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 

45 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

• (c2) 𝑛 ≥ 18 (2 + 𝜅 2/𝜆 ) log 

 4𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝜏



• (c3) 𝑇 ≥ 18 (2 + F ∞ (𝜆 )) log 

 4𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝜏



∨ 32 

 𝜅 2 

> ∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝

+ 𝜅 2

log (2/𝜏 )

by Lemma B.6, ℙ(𝛽 < 2) ≥ 1 − 3𝜏 .

Bounding S( 𝜆, 𝑇, 𝑛 ). Under the conditions: 

• (c4) 0 < 𝜆 < ∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 

• (c5) 𝑇 ≥ ( 4 + 18 F∞ (𝜆 )) log 

 12 𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝜏



,we can directly apply Lemma B.4, yielding 

ℙ S( 𝜆, 𝑇, 𝑛 ) ≤ 4 (𝐵 + 2𝑅𝜅 )𝜅 𝑛 √𝜆 +√︂ (𝜎 + 𝑅𝜅 )2N ( 𝜆 )

𝑛 

!

log 2

𝜏 

!

≥ 1 − 3𝜏. 

Bounding C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ). Finally, under condition (c1) and the following 

• (c6) 𝑇 ≥ ( 4 + 18 F∞ (𝜆 )) log 

 8𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝜏



,we can apply Lemma B.5, which gives 

ℙ

©«

C( 𝜆, 𝑇 ) ≤ 2𝑅 

vt

𝜆 F∞ (𝜆 ) log 

 8𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝜏



𝑇 

ª®®®¬

≥ 1 − 𝜏. 

Notice that the stated assumption on 𝑇 implies (c2), (c3), (c5), and (c6), by the definition of 𝑞 0 (and that 

𝑞 0 ≥ 2). Combining these with a union bound, with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 ,

ˆ𝑔 𝜆,𝑇,𝑛 − 𝑔 0 𝑋 

≤8 (𝐵 + 2𝑅𝜅 )𝜅 𝑛 √𝜆 +√︂ (𝜎 + 𝑅𝜅 )2N ( 𝜆 )

𝑛 

!

log 14 

𝛿 + 2𝑅 √𝜆 + 4𝑅 

vt

𝜆 F∞ (𝜆 ) log 

 56 𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



𝑇 

The assumed bound on 𝑇 implies that the final term is at most 𝑅 √𝜆 . Indeed, if 

𝑇 ≥ 18 (𝑞 0 + F ∞ (𝜆 )) log 

 84 𝜅 2

𝜆𝛿 



> 16 F∞ (𝜆 ) log 

 56 𝜅 2

𝜆𝛿 



,

then 

4𝑅 

vt

𝜆 F∞ (𝜆 ) log 

 56 𝜅 2

> 𝜆𝛿



𝑇 ≤ 𝑅 √𝜆. 

Substituting this into the preceding display gives the stated result. □

46 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

B.2 Proof of Theorem 4.1 

B.2.1 Preliminary results 

We begin with two key BART-specific lemmas: one that establishes rates on N ( 𝜆 ), and one that shows 

F∞ (𝜆 ) ≍ N ( 𝜆 ) when tree depths are bounded above. 

Lemma B.7. If the eigenvalues of an operator Σ satisfy 𝜍 𝑗 ≍ 𝑗 −2 log ( 𝑗 )2(𝑝 −1) , then as 𝜆 → 0 its effective dimension satisfies 

N ( 𝜆 ) ≍ 𝜆 −1/2 log (1/𝜆 )𝑝 −1.

Proof. Let 𝑗 𝜆 := max {𝑗 : 𝜍 𝑗 ≥ 𝜆 } represent the index of the last eigenvalue that is larger than or equal to 𝜆 ; since the eigenvalues are sorted in descending order, as 𝜆 decreases, 𝑗 𝜆 increases. We will first establish that 𝜆 ≍ 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) . We will also show that N ( 𝜆 ) ≍ 𝑗 𝜆 . Solving the first result for 𝑗 𝜆 as a function of of 𝜆 will then establish the claimed relationship. First, we substitute 𝑗 𝜆 into the assumed eigenvalue decay rate. This yields 

𝑐 1 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) ≤ 𝜍 𝑗 𝜆 ≤ 𝐶 1 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1)

for some constants 𝑐 1, 𝐶 1 > 0, by the definition of asymptotic equivalence. Similarly, for 𝜍 𝑗 𝜆 +1, there exists 𝑐 2, 𝐶 2 > 0 such that 

𝑐 2 ( 𝑗 𝜆 + 1)−2 log ( 𝑗 𝜆 + 1)2(𝑝 −1) ≤ 𝜍 𝑗 𝜆 +1 ≤ 𝐶 2 ( 𝑗 𝜆 + 1)−2 log ( 𝑗 𝜆 + 1)2(𝑝 −1) .

Because 𝜍 𝑗 𝜆 +1 < 𝜆 ≤ 𝜍 𝑗 𝜆 , we have 

𝑐 2 ( 𝑗 𝜆 + 1)−2 log ( 𝑗 𝜆 + 1)2(𝑝 −1) < 𝜆 ≤ 𝐶 1 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) .

As such, 𝜆 ≍ 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) .Second, we will show N ( 𝜆 ) ≍ 𝑗 𝜆 . To start, decompse N ( 𝜆 ) into two sums: 

N ( 𝜆 ) := Tr 



(Σ + 𝜆𝐼 )−1Σ



=

> ∞

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝜍 𝑗 

𝜍 𝑗 + 𝜆 =∑︁  

> 𝑗 ≤𝑗 𝜆

𝜍 𝑗 

𝜍 𝑗 + 𝜆 +∑︁ 

> 𝑗 >𝑗 𝜆

𝜍 𝑗 

𝜍 𝑗 + 𝜆 .

We consider the two sums separately. 

Sum 1: 𝑗 ≤ 𝑗 𝜆 . For each 𝑗 , we must have by definition that 𝜍 𝑗 ≥ 𝜆 . As such, 𝜍 𝑗  

> 𝜍 𝑗 +𝜆

≥ 1/2, and so 

Í𝑗 ≤ 𝑗 𝜆  

> 𝜍 𝑗
> 𝜍 𝑗 +𝜆

≥ 12 𝑗 𝜆 . In the other direction, since 𝜍 𝑗  

> 𝜍 𝑗 +𝜆

≤ 1, we must have Í𝑗 ≤ 𝑗 𝜆  

> 𝜍 𝑗
> 𝜍 𝑗 +𝜆

≤ 𝑗 𝜆 . We have therefore established that 12 𝑗 𝜆 ≤∑︁  

> 𝑗 ≤𝑗 𝜆

𝜍 𝑗 

𝜍 𝑗 + 𝜆 ≤ 𝑗 𝜆 =⇒∑︁  

> 𝑗 ≤𝑗 𝜆

𝜍 𝑗 

𝜍 𝑗 + 𝜆 ≍ 𝑗 𝜆 . (10) 

Sum 2: 𝑗 > 𝑗 𝜆 . Since 𝜍 𝑗  

> 𝜍 𝑗 +𝜆

≤ 𝜍 𝑗  

> 𝜆

, we can simplify this term to ∑︁ 

> 𝑗 >𝑗 𝜆

𝜍 𝑗 

𝜍 𝑗 + 𝜆 ≤ 1

𝜆 ∑︁ 𝑗 >𝑗 𝜆 

𝜍 𝑗 ≲ 1

𝜆 ∑︁ 𝑗 >𝑗 𝜆 

𝑗 −2 log ( 𝑗 )2(𝑝 −1) , (11) 47 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

where the asymptotic inequality follows from the assumed eigenvalue decay. Because 𝑗 −2 log ( 𝑗 )2(𝑝 −1)

is positive and monotonically decreasing for sufficiently large 𝑗 , we can apply the integral test to the sum and conclude that ∑︁ 

> 𝑗 >𝑗 𝜆

𝑗 −2 log ( 𝑗 )2(𝑝 −1) ≤ 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) +

∫ ∞

> 𝑗 𝜆

𝑗 −2 log ( 𝑗 )2(𝑝 −1) 𝑑𝑗 

= 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) +

∫ ∞  

> log (𝑗 𝜆 )

𝑢 2(𝑝 −1) 𝑒 −𝑢 𝑑𝑢 

≍ 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) + log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) exp (− log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )) ,

= 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) + 𝑗 −1 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1)

≍ 𝑗 −1 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) ,

where the second line follows from the substitution 𝑢 = log ( 𝑗 ) and the third line arises from noting that the integral is an incomplete upper Gamma function, which has the stated asymptotic behavior. Substituting this result into Eq. 11, and since we have established 𝜆 ≍ 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) ,∑︁ 

> 𝑗 >𝑗 𝜆

𝜍 𝑗 

𝜍 𝑗 + 𝜆 ≤ 1

𝜆 ∑︁ 𝑗 >𝑗 𝜆 

𝜍 𝑗 ≲ 𝑗 −1 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1)

𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) = 𝑗 𝜆 . (12) Combining both Eq. 10 and Eq. 12, we have shown that N ( 𝜆 ) ≍ 𝑗 𝜆 .Finally, we will solve for 𝑗 𝜆 :

𝜆 ≍ 𝑗 −2 

> 𝜆

log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )2(𝑝 −1) ⇐⇒ 𝑗 𝜆 ≍ 𝜆 −1/2 log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )𝑝 −1

⇐⇒ 𝑗 𝜆 ≍ 𝜆 −1/2 log (1/𝜆 )𝑝 −1

=⇒ N ( 𝜆 ) ≍ 𝜆 −1/2 log (1/𝜆 )𝑝 −1,

where the second line follows from the fact that log ( 𝑗 𝜆 ) ∼ 12 log (1/𝜆 ), which is itself established by a comparison of leading terms in the first expression; indeed, taking logarithms, 

log (1/𝜆 ) = 2 log ( 𝑗 𝜆 ) − 2(𝑝 − 1) log log ( 𝑗 𝜆 ) + 𝑂 (1),

and log log ( 𝑗 𝜆 ) = 𝑜 (log ( 𝑗 𝜆 )) . □

Lemma B.7 is theoretically significant because it shows that the effective dimension of ΣBART depends on the covariate dimension only logarithmically. Can this same rate be extended to F∞ (𝜆 )? By definition N ( 𝜆 ) ≤ F ∞ (𝜆 ), but the reverse inequality requires stricter conditions on the BART prior. 

Lemma B.8. For a regular BART prior with bound depth 𝐷 ≤ 𝑑 + < ∞,

F∞ (𝜆 ) ≲ N ( 𝜆 ),

with the constant uniform in 𝜆 .Proof. By Lemma A.1, it suffices to work with uniform split and covariate distributions on [0, 1]𝑝 . We can also absorb the fixed rescaling ΣBART = 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

Σ and write Σ for the population operator on 𝐿 2 ([ 0, 1]𝑝 ).48 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Let 𝐿 (𝑠, 𝑡 ) = exp (− | 𝑠 − 𝑡 |) be the Laplacian kernel and 𝐾 ⊗ (u, u′) = Î𝑝 𝑣 =1 𝐿 (𝑢 𝑣 , 𝑢 ′

> 𝑣

), and let Σ𝐿 and Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 

denote the corresponding integral operators. Regularity gives ℙ(𝐷 ≥ 𝑝 ) > 0, so the bounded-depth condition necessarily has 𝑑 + ≥ 𝑝 . The lower kernel bound in Proposition 3.3 therefore implies Σ ⪰ 𝑐 Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 

for some 𝑐 > 0. We next record a property of Σ𝐿 . If (𝜍 𝑗 , 𝑒 𝑗 ) is one of its normalized eigenpairs (that is, 

Σ𝐿 𝑒 𝑗 = 𝜍 𝑗 𝑒 𝑗 and 𝑒 𝑗 𝐿 2 ( [ 0,1] ) = 1), then ∫

> 𝐼

𝑒 𝑗 (𝑠 ) 𝑑𝑠 

> 2

≲ 𝜍 𝑗 (13) for every interval 𝐼 ⊆ [ 0, 1] and every 𝑗 , with a common implicit constant. Indeed, the eigenpairs of the exponential covariance kernel on a symmetric interval [− 𝑏, 𝑏 ] are known explicitly (see Xiu, 2010, Example 4.1): 

𝜍 𝑗 = 21 + 𝜔 2

> 𝑗

, 𝑒 𝑗 (𝑠 ) = 𝑐 𝑗 cos {𝜔 𝑗 (𝑠 − 1/2)} or 𝑒 𝑗 (𝑠 ) = 𝑐 𝑗 sin {𝜔 𝑗 (𝑠 − 1/2)} ,

where the explicit normalizing constants 𝑐 𝑗 are bounded above. Moreover, Tr (Σ𝐿 ) = ∫ 10 𝐿 (𝑠, 𝑠 ) 𝑑𝑠 = 1,so 𝜍 𝑗 ≤ 1 and the eigenvalue formula gives 𝜔 𝑗 ≥ 1. Consequently, integration over any interval 

𝐼 ⊆ [ 0, 1] gives ∫

> 𝐼

𝑒 𝑗 (𝑠 ) 𝑑𝑠 ≤ 2 sup 𝑗 |𝑐 𝑗 |

𝜔 𝑗 

;

squaring establishes ∫

> 𝐼

𝑒 𝑗 (𝑠 ) 𝑑𝑠 

> 2

≲ 1

𝜔 2

> 𝑗

≤ 21 + 𝜔 2

> 𝑗

= 𝜍 𝑗 ,

as claimed. Now, the eigenfunctions of Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 are the tensor products 𝑒 j (u) = Î𝑝 𝑣 =1 𝑒 𝑗 𝑣 (𝑢 𝑣 ), with eigenvalues 𝜍 j =

Î𝑝 𝑣 =1 𝜍 𝑗 𝑣 . Thus Eq. 13 implies, for every rectangular block 𝑅 = Î𝑝 𝑣 =1 𝐼 𝑣 , with 𝜓 𝑅 := 1{u ∈ 𝑅 },

⟨𝜓 𝑅 , 𝑒 j⟩ 2 =

> 𝑝

Ö

> 𝑣 =1

∫

> 𝐼 𝑣

𝑒 𝑗 𝑣 (𝑠 ) 𝑑𝑠 

> 2

≲ 𝜍 j.

Consequently, 

⟨𝜓 𝑅 , (𝑐 Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 + 𝜆𝐼 )−1𝜓 𝑅 ⟩ ≲∑︁ 

> j

𝜍 j

𝑐𝜍 j + 𝜆 

= 1

𝑐 Tr {( 𝑐 Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 + 𝜆𝐼 )−1𝑐 Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 }.

Since Σ ⪰ 𝑐 Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 , the preceding display gives 

⟨𝜓 𝑅 , (Σ + 𝜆𝐼 )−1𝜓 𝑅 ⟩ ≤ ⟨ 𝜓 𝑅 , (𝑐 Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 + 𝜆𝐼 )−1𝜓 𝑅 ⟩

≲ Tr {( 𝑐 Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 + 𝜆𝐼 )−1𝑐 Σ⊗𝑝 𝐿 }

≲ Tr {( Σ + 𝜆𝐼 )−1Σ} = N ( 𝜆 ),

(14) where the last line follows since the map 𝑡 ↦ → 𝑡 /( 𝑡 + 𝜆 ) preserves the Loewner order. Finally, for a tree given by a draw 𝜔 , every leaf indicator is the indicator of a rectangular block, and so applying the definition of Σ𝜔 ,

Tr 



Σ−1 

> 𝜆

Σ𝜔 



=∑︁ 

> l∈ L ( 𝜔 )

⟨𝜓 l, Σ−1 

> 𝜆

𝜓 l⟩.

49 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Because 𝐷 ≤ 𝑑 +, the tree has at most 2𝑑 +

leaves. Applying Eq. 14 to each leaf and taking the supremum over 𝜔 proves 

F∞ (𝜆 ) ≲ 2𝑑 +

N ( 𝜆 ) ≲ N ( 𝜆 ). □

We can now combine the derived effective dimension in Lemma B.7 with the generalized Theorem B.1 above to specialize the latter to our case. 

Lemma B.9. Under the stated assumptions on the data, suppose the BART prior is such that the effective dimension of its corresponding kernel operator satisfies N ( 𝜆 ) ≍ 𝜆 −1/2 log (1/𝜆 )𝑝 −1 as 𝜆 → 0. Suppose further that 𝜆 𝑛 ≍ 𝑛 −2/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3. There exist constants 𝑐 0, 𝑐 1, 𝑛 0 > 0, not depending on 𝑛 or 𝛿 , such that, for any 𝛿 ∈ ( 0, 1/2], if 

𝑛 ≥ 𝑛 0 ∨ 𝑐 0 log 

 1

𝛿 

3

(15) 

and 

𝑇 𝑛 ≥ 𝑐 1F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 ) log 

 𝑛 𝛿 



, (16) 

then, with probability at least 1 − 𝛿 ,

ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 − 𝑔 0 𝑋 ≲ 𝑛 −1/3 log (𝑛 ) (𝑝 −1)/ 3 log 

 1

𝛿 



.

Proof. We will start by showing that the assumed bound on 𝑇 𝑛 implies Eq. 6 in Theorem B.1, and then show that the assumed bound on 𝑛 implies Eq. 7. Those equations, plus the assumption on 𝜆 𝑛 ,are sufficient to apply Theorem B.1 above. By Lemma A.1 above, the fixed factor 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

in ΣBART may be absorbed into 𝑐 0, 𝑐 1, and 𝑛 0, and we therefore proceed without considering any constant scaling of Σ

or 𝜆 𝑛 .We first verify the tree-count condition. Since 

F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 ) ≥ N ( 𝜆 𝑛 ) −→ ∞ 

as 𝑛 → ∞ , where the convergence follows from 𝜆 𝑛 → 0 and the assumed effective-dimension rate, the fixed term 𝑞 0 may be absorbed into F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 ). Then substituting the assumed order of 𝜆 𝑛 into Eq. 6, 

18 (𝑞 0 + F ∞ (𝜆 𝑛 )) log 

 84 

𝜆 𝑛 𝛿 



≲ F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 )



log (84 ) − log 



𝑛 −2/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3

− log (𝛿 )



= F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 )

 23 log (𝑛 ) − 2(𝑝 − 1)

3 log log (𝑛 ) + log (1/𝛿 ) + log (84 )



≲ F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 )( log (𝑛 ) + log (1/𝛿 )) 

= F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 ) log 

 𝑛 𝛿 



.

The right-hand side is bounded by Eq. 16 by the choice of 𝑐 1. Thus Eq. 16 implies Eq. 6 in Theorem B.1. Next consider the sample-size condition. Substituting 𝜆 𝑛 into the right-hand side of Eq. 7, simplifying as above, and expanding its logarithm gives 

18 (2 + 𝜆 −1 

> 𝑛

) log 

 28 

𝜆 𝑛 𝛿 



≲ 𝑛 2/3 log (𝑛 )−2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 log 28 𝑛 2/3

log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3𝛿 

!

= 𝑛 2/3 log (𝑛 )−2(𝑝 −1)/ 3



log (28 ) + 23 log (𝑛 ) − 2(𝑝 − 1)

3 log log (𝑛 ) + log (1/𝛿 )



≲ 𝑛 2/3 log (𝑛 )−2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 (log (𝑛 ) + log (1/𝛿 )) .

50 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Let 𝐶 denote the fixed constant implicit in the last inequality. Choose 𝑛 0 large enough that, for every 

𝑛 ≥ 𝑛 0 > 1, 0 < 𝜆 𝑛 ≤ 34 ∥Σ∥𝑜𝑝 , F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 ) ≥ 1, and 

𝐶 log (𝑛 ) ≤ 12 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3.

Such a choice is possible because 𝜆 𝑛 → 0 and the ratio of the right-hand side to log (𝑛 ) diverges. Choose 𝑐 0 ≥ ( 2𝐶 )3. Now Eq. 15 gives 𝐶 log (1/𝛿 ) ≤ 12 𝑛 1/3 ≤ 12 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3. It follows that 

18 (2 + 𝜆 −1 

> 𝑛

) log 

 28 

𝜆 𝑛 𝛿 



≤ 𝐶𝑛 2/3 log (𝑛 )−2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 (log (𝑛 ) + log (1/𝛿 )) ≤ 𝑛 2/3 log (𝑛 )−2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 

𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3

= 𝑛. 

Thus Eq. 15 implies Eq. 7 in Theorem B.1. It remains to calculate the bound from Theorem B.1. The assumed effective-dimension rate and the choice of penalty give 

N ( 𝜆 𝑛 ) ≍ 𝜆 −1/2 

> 𝑛

log (1/𝜆 𝑛 )𝑝 −1

≍ 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )− ( 𝑝 −1)/ 3

 23 log (𝑛 ) − 2(𝑝 − 1)

3 log log (𝑛 ) + 𝑂 (1)

 𝑝 −1

≍ 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )− ( 𝑝 −1)/ 3 log (𝑛 )𝑝 −1

= 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3.

Here the 𝑂 (1) term accounts for the fixed constants in the assumed order of 𝜆 𝑛 .Finally, substituting 𝜆 𝑛 and the preceding order of N ( 𝜆 𝑛 ) into Eq. 8, and using 𝜅 = 1, gives 

ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 − 𝑔 0 𝑋 ≤ 8 𝐵 + 2𝑅 𝑛 √𝜆 𝑛 

+ ( 𝜎 + 𝑅 )√︂ N ( 𝜆 𝑛 )

𝑛 

!

log 

 14 

𝛿 



+ 3𝑅 √︁ 𝜆 𝑛 

≲ ©«

1

𝑛 



𝑛 −2/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 31/2 +√︄ 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3

𝑛 

ª®®¬

log 

 14 

𝛿 



+



𝑛 −2/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 31/2

≲



𝑛 −2/3 log (𝑛 )− ( 𝑝 −1)/ 3 + 𝑛 −1/3 log (𝑛 ) (𝑝 −1)/ 3

log 

 14 

𝛿 



+ 𝑛 −1/3 log (𝑛 ) (𝑝 −1)/ 3

≲ 𝑛 −1/3 log (𝑛 ) (𝑝 −1)/ 3 log 

 1

𝛿 



,

as claimed, where the last line uses 𝛿 ≤ 1/2. □

B.2.2 Main result 

Finally, we can integrate over 𝛿 in Lemma B.9 to prove Theorem 4.1. 51 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Proof of Theorem 4.1. Let 𝑎 𝑛 := 𝑛 −2/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 and 𝑍 𝑛 := ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 − 𝑔 0 2 

> 𝑋

, so 𝜆 𝑛 ≍ 𝑎 𝑛 , and we aim to prove 𝔼 [𝑍 𝑛 ] ≲ 𝑎 𝑛 .We first identify a range of confidence levels on which Lemma B.9 applies uniformly. Fix 𝐾 > 8/3 and let 𝛿 ∗ := 𝑛 −𝐾 . For every 𝛿 ∈ [ 𝛿 ∗, 1/2],

log 

 𝑛 𝛿 



≤ log 



𝑛 𝐾 +1

= (𝐾 + 1) log (𝑛 ).

Consequently, the tree-count condition in Lemma B.9 holds throughout this range whenever 

𝑇 𝑛 ≥ 𝑐 1 (𝐾 + 1)F ∞ (𝜆 𝑛 ) log (𝑛 ). (17) This is the only condition on 𝑇 𝑛 used in the remainder of the proof. The general bound F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 ) ≤ 𝜆 −1

> 𝑛

gives 

F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 ) log (𝑛 ) ≤ 𝜆 −1 

> 𝑛

log (𝑛 )

≲ 𝑛 2/3 log (𝑛 )−2(𝑝 −1)/ 3 log (𝑛 )

= 𝑛 2/3 log (𝑛 )1−2(𝑝 −1)/ 3.

Therefore the assumed lower bound on 𝑇 𝑛 , with 𝑐 𝑇 sufficiently large, implies Eq. 17 in Lemma B.9. If instead 𝐷 ≤ 𝑑 + < ∞, Lemma B.8 and Lemma B.7 give 

F∞ (𝜆 𝑛 ) log (𝑛 ) ≲ N ( 𝜆 𝑛 ) log (𝑛 )≍ 𝜆 −1/2 

> 𝑛

log (1/𝜆 𝑛 )𝑝 −1 log (𝑛 )

= (𝑛 −2/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3)−1/2

 23 log (𝑛 ) − 2(𝑝 − 1)

3 log log (𝑛 ) + 𝑂 (1)

 𝑝 −1

log (𝑛 )≍ 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )− ( 𝑝 −1)/ 3 log (𝑛 )𝑝 −1 log (𝑛 )

= 𝑛 1/3 log (𝑛 )1+2(𝑝 −1)/ 3,

so the lower bound on 𝑇 𝑛 in the second statement likewise implies Eq. 17. The sample-size condition in Lemma B.9 also holds uniformly over 𝛿 ∈ [ 𝛿 ∗, 1/2] for all sufficiently large 𝑛 . Indeed, 

𝑐 0 log (1/𝛿 )3 ≤ 𝑐 0 𝐾 3 log (𝑛 )3 = 𝑜 (𝑛 ).

Hence there is a fixed 𝑛 1 such that 𝑛 ≥ 𝑐 0 𝐾 3 log (𝑛 )3 for every 𝑛 ≥ 𝑛 1. We define 𝑛 0 for Theorem 4.1 to be max {𝑛 1, 𝑛 ′

> 0

}, where 𝑛 ′ 

> 0

is the fixed 𝑛 0 in Lemma B.9. By Lemma B.9, there is a fixed 𝐶 2 > 0 such that 

ℙ



𝑍 𝑛 > 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 log (1/𝛿 )2

≤ 𝛿 

for every 𝛿 ∈ [ 𝑛 −𝐾 , 1/2]. Now change variables from 𝛿 to 𝑡 := 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 log (1/𝛿 )2, which has inverse 

𝛿 (𝑡 ) := exp 



−√︂ 𝑡 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 



.

Under this change of variables, the endpoints 𝛿 = 1/2 and 𝛿 = 𝑛 −𝐾 become, respectively, 

𝑡 0 := 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 log (2)2 and 𝑡 ∗ := 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 𝐾 2 log (𝑛 )2.

52 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Thus, for every 𝑡 ∈ [ 𝑡 0, 𝑡 ∗], the probability bound becomes 

ℙ(𝑍 𝑛 > 𝑡 ) ≤ exp 



−√︂ 𝑡 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 



. (18) We can now integrate the tail probability, first up to 𝑡 ∗ using only Lemma B.9, and then past 𝑡 ∗

additionaly relying on a separate moment bound based on sub-exponentiality. First, 

𝔼 [min {𝑍 𝑛 , 𝑡 ∗}] =

∫ 𝑡 ∗

> 0

ℙ(𝑍 𝑛 > 𝑡 ) 𝑑𝑡 

≤ 𝑡 0 +

∫ 𝑡 ∗

> 𝑡 0

exp 



−√︂ 𝑡 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 



𝑑𝑡 

≤ 𝑡 0 +

∫ ∞

> 0

exp 



−√︂ 𝑡 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 



𝑑𝑡. 

In the final integral, make the substitution 𝑠 =√︁ 𝑡 /( 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 ), so that 𝑡 = 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 𝑠 2 and 𝑑𝑡 = 2𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 𝑠 𝑑𝑠 . Then 

∫ ∞

> 0

exp 



−√︂ 𝑡 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 



𝑑𝑡 = 2𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 

∫ ∞

> 0

𝑠𝑒 −𝑠 𝑑𝑠 

= 2𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 .

Since 𝑡 0 ≍ 𝑎 𝑛 , we have 

𝔼 [min {𝑍 𝑛 , 𝑡 ∗}] ≲ 𝑎 𝑛 . (19) It remains to control the tail probability above 𝑡 ∗. At the minimizing ˆ𝛽 , the ridge objective clearly upper bounds the penalty term alone. At the value 𝛽 = 0, the ridge objective simplifies to 𝔼 𝑛 [𝑌 2],where 𝔼 𝑛 is the empirical mean, and must be larger than the objective at ˆ𝛽 . Thus 

𝜆 𝑛 

𝜎 2

> 𝜇

ˆ𝛽 22 ≤ 𝔼 𝑛 [𝑌 2 

> 𝑖

].

By Cauchy–Schwarz, 

ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 2 

> 𝑋

= 𝔼 𝑋 

h

(𝜙 𝑇 (𝑋 )⊤ ˆ𝛽 )2i

≤ 𝔼 𝑋 

∥𝜙 𝑇 ∥22

 ˆ𝛽 22

≤ 𝜎 2

> 𝜇

𝜆 𝑛 

𝔼 𝑛 [𝑌 2 

> 𝑖

],

where in the last line we have also used that ∥𝜙 𝑇 ∥2 = 1, since for every x, exactly one leaf indicator in each tree is active. Therefore 

𝑍 𝑛 ≤ 2 ˆ𝑔 𝑇,𝑛 2 

> 𝑋

+ 2∥𝑔 0 ∥2 

> 𝑋

≤ 2𝜎 2

> 𝜇

𝜆 𝑛 

𝔼 𝑛 [𝑌 2 

> 𝑖

] + 2∥𝑔 0 ∥2 

> 𝑋

.

Because the regression noise is sub-exponential, 𝔼 [𝑌 2 

> 𝑖

] and 𝔼 [𝑌 4 

> 𝑖

] are uniformly bounded, and so 

𝔼 [𝔼 𝑛 [𝑌 2 

> 𝑖

]2] is also uniformly bounded. Squaring the bound on 𝑍 𝑛 and using 𝜆 𝑛 → 0 then gives 

𝔼 [𝑍 2

> 𝑛

] ≲ 𝜆 −2 

> 𝑛

. (20) 53 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

Now, at the upper endpoint, Eq. 18 gives 

ℙ(𝑍 𝑛 > 𝑡 ∗) ≤ exp ©«

−√︄ 𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 𝐾 2 log (𝑛 )2

𝐶 2𝑎 𝑛 

ª®¬

= exp (− 𝐾 log (𝑛 )) 

= 𝑛 −𝐾 .

By Cauchy–Schwarz and Eq. 20, 

𝔼 [max {𝑍 𝑛 − 𝑡 ∗, 0}] ≤ 𝔼 [𝑍 𝑛 1{𝑍 𝑛 > 𝑡 ∗}] ≤ 𝔼 [𝑍 2

> 𝑛

]1/2ℙ(𝑍 𝑛 > 𝑡 ∗)1/2

≲ 𝜆 −1 

> 𝑛

𝑛 −𝐾 /2.

Comparing this rate to 𝑎 𝑛 , we find 

𝜆 −1 

> 𝑛

𝑛 −𝐾 /2

𝑎 𝑛 

≍ 𝑛 2/3 log (𝑛 )−2(𝑝 −1)/ 3𝑛 −𝐾 /2

𝑛 −2/3 log (𝑛 )2(𝑝 −1)/ 3

= 𝑛 4/3−𝐾 /2 log (𝑛 )−4(𝑝 −1)/ 3

→ 0,

because 𝐾 > 8/3. Thus 𝔼 [max {𝑍 𝑛 − 𝑡 ∗, 0}] ≲ 𝑎 𝑛 . Combining this with Eq. 19 yields 

𝔼 [𝑍 𝑛 ] = 𝔼 [min {𝑍 𝑛 , 𝑡 ∗}] + 𝔼 [( 𝑍 𝑛 − 𝑡 ∗)+] ≲ 𝑎 𝑛 ,

as claimed. □

54 The Gaussian Process Limit of BART July 30, 2026 

## C Additional simulation results 

C.1 Uncertainty quantification 

Figure C.1 plots results from the same experiment as in Figure 5, but varying the sample size and residual standard deviation. Both the coverage and width of credible intervals are plotted for the regression function, which as in the main text is drawn from a GP (0, 𝑘 BART ) prior. While proper coverage requires better tuning of the BART hyperparameters, the coverage and width of the intervals under the random BART features models closely track those of the full BART model. Full BART 75 features 250 features 75 on [0, 1] 250 on [0, 1]               

> 95% CI coverage  95% CI width
> 25 100 400 25 100 400 25 100 400 25 100 400 25 100 400
> 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0

Sample size 

Residual std. dev. 

> 0.25
> 1

Figure C.1: Coverage and interval width. For full BART and the same four variations of random BART features as in the main text, we plot the coverage and width of 95% credible intervals of the regression function, which is drawn from a GP (0, 𝑘 BART ) prior in reality. Results are plotted for three sample sizes and two different residual standard deviations. 

55