Title: 2607.27542v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.27542v1

Published Time: Fri, 31 Jul 2026 00:18:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

1

TITLE: Towards Best Practices for Covariate Adjustment in Regulatory Trials: From 

Fixed to Data -Adaptive Approaches 

AUTHORS: 

• Laura B. Balzer, Division of Biostatistics, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA ,

USA 

• Lei Nie, Division of Biometrics IV, OB/OTS/CDER/FDA, Silver Spring, Maryland , USA. 

• Issa J. Dahabreh, Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan 

School of Public Health and Smith Center for Outcomes Research, Beth Israel 

Deaconess Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 

• Kajsa Kvist, Novo Nordisk A/S, Denmark .

• Tianyue Zhou, Division of Biostatistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 

USA 

• Demissie Alemayehu, Data Science and Analytics, Pfizer Inc., New York, NY, USA .

• Larry Han, Department of Public Health and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, 

Boston, MA, USA 

• Zhiwei Zhang, Biostatistics Innovation Group, Gilead Sciences, Foster City, CA, USA 

• Salina P. Waddy, National Center for the Advancement of Translational Science, 

National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 

• Andrew Mertens, Division of Biostatistics, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, 

CA, USA 

• Christian B. Pipper, Biostatistics Methods, Novo Nordisk A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark 

and Section of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Biodemography, University of Southern 

Denmark, Odense, Denmark 

• Ken Wiley, Jr., National Center for the Advancement of Translational Science, National 

Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland , USA 

• Margot Yann, Forum for Collaborative Research, School of Public Health, University of 

California Berkeley , USA 

• Gilmer Valdes, OncoBrain Inc and Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida , USA 

• Xu Shi, Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 

• Mark van der Laan, Division of Biostatistics, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, 

CA, USA 

• Maya Petersen, Division of Biostatistics, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 

USA 

• Kelly Van Lancker, Department of Mathematics, Computer Science and Statistics, Ghent 

University, Ghent, Belgium and Department of Mathematics and Data Science, Vrije 

Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium 

Corresponding author: Laura B. Balzer (laura.balzer@berkeley.edu) arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

2

ABSTRACT: 

While randomization justifies the use of unadjusted effect estimator s in randomized trials, there 

is growing interest in covariate adjustment to improve precision . Adjusting for baseline variables 

that are prognostic of the outcome can reduce estimator varianc e, resulting in narrower 

confidence intervals and increased statistical power. Recent guidance by the U.S. Food and 

Drug Administration support s fixed adjustment for prognostic covariates using parametric 

regression models . However, this guidance does not address more flexible approaches using 

data -adaptive or machine learning method s. We offer our perspectives on covariate adjustment 

to improve analytic precision . We focus on estimating the average effect for the target 

population in trials with minimal outcome missingness. We provide a non -technical overview of 

effect estimators that are unadjusted and effect estimators using fixed versus data -adaptive 

adjustment . We offer practical suggestions for conducting adjusted analyses that are data -

adaptive, fully pre -specified, transparently and reproducibly implemented , robust to model 

mis specification, and guaranteed to improve precision relative to unadjusted analys es – all while 

preserving statistical validity and the ca usal effect of interest . We hope that sharing our 

perspectives will fost er broader discussion and eventual acceptance of principled, pre -specified, 

data -adaptive covariate adjustment in randomized trials. 

KEY WORDS: data -adaptive, efficiency, machine learning, precision, robustness , statistical 

power arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

3

# INTRODUCTION 

Randomized controlled trials are widely considered the preferred approach for evaluating the 

efficacy of new medical treatments or devices, because randomization helps ensure that 

persons assigned to different treatment group s are comparable on both measured and 

unmeasured factors at baseline . In settings with minimal missingness on the outcome, 

randomization is often sufficient to support unbiased estimation with unadjusted effect 

estimators . Specifically, we can simply compar e the average outcomes between treatment 

groups . However, statistical efficiency can be meaningfully improved by adjusting for baseline 

characteristics that are associated with the outcome .1–4 This approach is known as “covariate 

adjustment” and makes better use of available data without undermining the validity of the trial. 

Covariate adjustment can lead to narrower confidence intervals and increased statistical power 

— helping researchers and regulators draw more precise conclusions from a given trial. 

There is a rich body of work on covariate adjustment to improve the precision of trial analyses .

This literature start s with regression -style approaches in the early 1930s and extends to recent 

advances harnessing modern machine learning methods .5–10 Furthermore, regulatory authorities 

including the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 

(FDA) as well as the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) have issued guidance and 

recommendations for using covariate adjustment in trial analys es.11 –14 Indeed, the r ecent FDA 

guidance supports covariate adjustment as a valuable tool to improve the precision of trial effect 

estimates when pre -specified and appropriately implemente d.14 

As a group of biostatisticians and clinical trialists from academia, industry, regulatory agencies, 

and federal research institutions, we view covariate adjustment approaches as valuable tool s for 

improving the precision of trial analyses without compromising validity . However, there are open 

questions and challenges related to their implementation. Here, we share our perspectives on 

the use of covariate adjustment to improve precision in regulatory science , overall and 

particularly when implementing such adjustment using data -adaptive or machine learning 

methods. Our exposition is intentionally non -technical to reach a diverse group of stakeholders 

involved in regulatory science . Throughout, we defer technical details to the Appendices and 

cited references. This work grew out of the Forum on the Integration of Observational and 

Randomized Data (FIORD) meeting, held in November 2024 in Bethesda, Maryland, USA. arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

4

The remaining article is organized as follows. We first provide the scope o f our overvie w: trials 

with minimal outcome missingness and with a goal of estimating marginal (i.e. population -

average ) effects. We then review how to obtain marginal effect estimates without adjustment 

and with fixed adjustment for prognostic covariates . Next, we provide the rationale for data -

adaptive approaches to covariate adjustment and discus s some possible implementations .

Then, we offer our suggestions for applying data -adaptive adjustment in practice and address 

common concerns , including precision losses, lack of reproducibilit y, and poor transparency .

We close with a brief discussion. 

SCOPE OF THIS OVER VIEW 

Throughout , we focus on a frequentist approach to covariate adjustment and the target 

population framework, in which trial participants are viewed as a random sample from a larger 

population of interest. This perspective is consistent with recent FDA guidance and facilitates 

inference that generalizes beyond the study sample .14 Alternative inferential paradigms —

including Bayesian methods, randomization -based inference, or finite -sample methods — may 

also be appropriate in certain settings and provide complementary approaches (e.g., 15 –18 ).

Altoge ther, t he choice of inferential paradigm should align with the trial design and intended 

interpretation of uncertainty. 

We also focus on clinical trials that are intended to support regulatory decisions and have high 

measurement coverage for the outcome. In such settings , the motivation for covariate 

adjustment is to improve precision and statistical power (rather than account for missing data) .

We also consider an estimand aligned with the intent ion -to -treat principle , which captures the 

effect of assignment to the intervention group versus the assignment to the control group, 

regardless of post -randomization events .13 We recognize that other settings , including more 

pragmatic trials , may involve substantial missing ness and /or different research objectives, such 

as estimating effect s that account for adherence to the assigned intervention . Here, o ur goal is 

to clarify key ideas regarding covariate adjustment in settings where the main inferential goal is 

improving efficiency rather than reducing bias and where key assumptions are largely justified 

by the trial design : treatment assignment is randomized and persons with measured outcomes 

are representative of persons with missing outcomes. 

Throughout, we focus on estimation and inference for marginal (i.e., population -average) 

effects . Let  𝑌 1 denote the counterfactual outcome under assignment to the intervention group arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

5

(𝐴 = 1) and  𝑌 0 denote the counterfactual outcome under assignment to the control group ( 𝐴 =

0). The quantities  𝔼 (𝑌 1) and  𝔼 (𝑌 0) represent the average outcomes that would be observed if 

everyone in the population were assigned to the intervention group and to the control group, 

respectively. Marginal effects are obtained by contrasting these averages on the scale of 

interest. For example, the marginal effect can be defined on the additive scale as  𝔼 (𝑌 1) −

𝔼 (𝑌 0) or on the relative scale as  𝔼 (𝑌 1)/ 𝔼 (𝑌 0).

Marginal effects are distinct from conditional effects , which contrast average outcomes by 

assignment groups among individuals with the same values of baseline covariates. This 

distinction concerns the target of inference and should be distinguished from the choice of 

modeling approach . Marginal and conditional effect measures obtained from nonlinear models 

are generally not equal because of non -collapsibility .19 While conditional estimates are often 

obtained from nonlinear models includ ing terms for the assignment group and baseline 

covariates, many of these models can also be used to estimate marginal effects. We return to 

this point below. Although both types of effects can be scientifically meaningful, they answer 

different questions. Throughout, we focus on marginal effects because they often align most 

closely with regulatory and clinical decision -making .11 

# THE UNADJUSTED ANALYSIS 

For estimation and inference of marginal effects , suppose that we have conducted a two -group 

trial with  𝑁  participants randomiz ed to the intervention group or to the control group . Let  𝐴  be an 

indicator of being randomized to the intervention group , and  𝑌  be the outcome of interest, 

measured at the end of the study . For simplicity, we focus on binary, categorical, continuous, 

and count outcomes. Due to randomization, the average counterfactual outcome under 

assignment level  𝑎 , denoted  𝔼 (𝑌 𝑎 ), equals the average observed outcom e under assignment to 

group  𝑎 , denoted  𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 = 𝑎 ). As a result, marginal (intention -to -treat ) effects are identified from 

the trial data by comparing average outcomes between the randomized groups . Specifically , the 

marginal effect is identified as  𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 = 1) − 𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 = 0) on the additive scale and as 

𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 = 1)/𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 = 0) on the relative scale .

A natural point estimate of the se quantities is the “unadjusted estimator” , which contrast s mean 

outcomes in the two randomized groups. The group -specific mean outcome is estimated by arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

6

taking the average outcome observed among participants assigned to that group:  𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 𝑎 ) =  

> ∑1(𝐴 𝑖 =𝑎 )𝑌 𝑖
> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =1
> ∑1(𝐴 𝑖 =𝑎 )𝑁
> 𝑖 =1

where  1(𝐴 𝑖 = 𝑎 ) is an indicator function, equaling 1 if participant  𝑖  is in group  𝑎  and 

0 otherwise . The corresponding estimators of the marginal effect s are  𝔼 ̂ (𝑌 |𝐴 = 1) − 𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 0)

on the additive scale and  𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 1)/𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 0) on the relative scale. Due to random 

assignment of treatment groups in trials , these estimators are consistent for the marginal 

effects. Consisten t estimators converge to the ir target s as sample size grows .20 We refer to 

Appendix A for details on statistical inference, including variance estimation, construction of 

confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing. 

The unadjusted estimator is widely accepted and often the default analysis in randomized trials. 

We now consider how baseline covariates can be incorporated into the analysis to improve 

precision , while preserving the target of inference and maintain ing statistical validity. We begin 

with an overview of approach es based on “fixed” adjustment, where the adjustment covariates 

and fun ctional form are unresponsive to the trial data. Then we discuss data -adaptive 

approaches to covariate adjustment. 

# FIXED ADJUSTMENT 

Let  𝑊  denote baseline covariates that are measured prior to randomization or, at a minimum, 

not influenced by the trial group. Furthermore,  𝑉  is a subset of baseline covariates  𝑊  that are 

believed to be highly prognostic of the outcome. For example,  𝑉  might include the outcome 

measure at baseline (e.g., blood pressure at baseline when the primary endpoint is blood 

pressure at endline) . Alternatively, V may include a “prognostic score” (scalar) derived from 

historical or external data .21,22 For a wide variety of outcome types, a more precise estimator of 

the marginal effect can be obtained by incorporating the prognostic covariates  𝑉  through a

procedure commonly referred to as “G -computation” or “standardization” .1,14,23 

A point estimate is obtained as follows, where we c onsider a single covariate  𝑉  for simplicity .

1.  Regress the outcome  𝑌  on randomized assignment  𝐴  and the prognostic covariate  𝑉 

according to a pre -specified model for the conditional mean outcome  𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 , 𝑉 ).

Common choices include generalized linear models (GLMs) fit by maximum likelihood 

estimation , such as linear regression for continuous outcomes, logistic regression for 

binary outcomes, and a log -linear regression for count or rate outcomes. Th e regression arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

7

model must include an intercept and a main term for  𝐴 . For example, we could specify a

main -terms GLM as  𝑔 {𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 , 𝑉 )} = 𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1𝐴 + 𝛽 2𝑉  where  g{∙} denotes the canonical link 

function (e.g., the identity, logit, or log link). Equivalently, we can express this regression 

model as  𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 , 𝑉 ) = 𝑔 −1(𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1𝐴 + 𝛽 2𝑉 ).

2.  Using the regression fit , predict the outcome for all  𝑁  participants under assignment to 

the intervention group and under assignment to the control group : 𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 1, 𝑉 𝑖 ) =

𝑔 −1(𝛽 ̂0 + 𝛽 ̂1 + 𝛽 ̂2𝑉 𝑖 ) and  𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 0, 𝑉 𝑖 ) = 𝑔 −1(𝛽 ̂0 + 𝛽 ̂2𝑉 𝑖 ) for  𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 .

3.  Average these predictions across all  𝑁  participants to obtain marginal mean estimates 

under each assignment strategy : 1 

> 𝑁

∑ 𝔼 ̂ (𝑌 |𝐴 = 1, 𝑉 𝑖 )𝑁  

> 𝑖 =1

versus  1 

> 𝑁

∑ 𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 0, 𝑉 𝑖 )𝑁  

> 𝑖 =1

. Then 

contrast on the scale of interest. 

We refer to Appendix A for an overview of obtaining statistical inference. 

Th e regression model in Step 1 is viewed as a “working” model, meaning that it does not need 

to represent the true data -generating process .2 Indeed, due to randomization of the treatment 

group, approaches using covariate adjustment are quite robust to the model mis specification .

As an illustration, suppose the true outcome regression contains an interaction between the 

assignment A and the prognostic covariate  𝑉 : 𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 , 𝑉 ) = 𝑔 −1(𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1𝐴 + 𝛽 2𝑉 + 𝛽 3𝐴𝑉 ). If we 

use a main -terms model omitting the interaction, the resulting G -computation estimator remains 

consistent for the marginal effect. More generally, consistency follows whenever the prediction 

unbiasedness condition holds; that is, when the average of the predicted outcome s equals the 

average of the observed outcome s within each randomized group:  1 

> 𝑁

∑ 𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 𝑎 , 𝑉 𝑖 )𝑁  

> 𝑖 =1

=

𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 𝑎 ) for  𝑎 = {0,1}.2,24 –26  This condition is commonly achieved by specifying a GLM with 

the canonical link, an intercept, and a main term for the randomized assignmen t and then fitting 

the regression with maximum likelihood or quasi -likelihood estimation .

Importantly, a s the outcome regression model more closely approximates the true conditional 

expectation , the resulting G-computation estimator becomes more precise . Under correct 

specification of the outcome regression model, the estimator is “local ly efficien t”, yielding the 

tightest confidence intervals and most statistical power .1,2 We note that if the prognostic 

covariates  𝑉  contain missing values, simple approaches such as mean or mode imputation can 

be used , because baseline covariates are included solely to improve precision, rather than to 

remove bias .27,28 arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

8

The G-computation approach to covariate adjustment focuses on improving precision by 

estimating the conditional mean outcome  𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 , 𝑉 ). Alternative approaches such as inverse 

weighting exploit information in the assignment mechanism, which is often summarized through 

the “propensity score” : the conditional probability of being randomized to the intervention group 

given the covariates , denoted  ℙ(𝐴 = 1|𝑉 ). In observational studies, propensity score methods 

are commonly used to account for confounding. In randomized trials, there is no confounding 

and the assignment probability is known; so , estimation of the propensity score is not required. 

Nevertheless, in finite samples, estimating the known propensity score  ℙ̂(𝐴 = 1|𝑉 ) in trials can 

improve precision by accounting for chance imbalances on predictive covariates by group .29 –31 

Alternative estimators , such as augmented inverse probability weighting (AIPW) and targeted 

minimum loss -based estimation (TMLE) , combine estimates of the outcome regression and the 

propensity score and can provide additional gains in efficiency relative to approaches relying on 

only estimating the outcome regression or the propensity score .29,32 –35 For trials, Rosenblum and 

van der Laan provide a comprehensive overview of these approaches, treating the G -

computation estimator as a special case and discussing their relationship to more traditional 

approaches , such as the analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). 2 Additional overviews can be found 

in Tsiatis et al. and Van Lancker et al .1,4 Notably, AIPW and TMLE are often referred to as 

“doubly robust” estimators , because they will yield a consistent point estimate if either the 

outcome regression or p ropensity score model is correctly specified . In randomized trial s where 

the propensity score is known, these approaches are fully model -robust . Therefore, we can 

again use “working ” models for the outcome regression and propensity score to improve 

precision .

Thus far, we have considered “fixed” approaches to covariate adjustment where the choice s of 

the covariate set  𝑉  and the functional form of the outcome regression model and/or propensity 

score model do not incorporate or adapt to the trial data . Approaches based on fixed adjustment 

may improve precision relative to the unadjusted estimator, but such gains are generally not 

guaranteed in small or large samples. I ndeed, i ncluding covariates that are weakly prognostic or 

unrelated to the outcome can reduce the precision of trial analyses in practice . This precision 

loss arises because including non -prognostic covariates can increase variability without 

meaningfully reducing residual outcome variation. In an ideal setting, with perfect knowledge, 

such covariates would never be inclu ded in the adjustment set. In practice, however, the 

prognostic value of the candidate covariates is typically not known with certainty. Indeed, recent arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

9

examples have shown that forced adjustment can lead to precision losses relative to the 

unadjusted effect estimator in finite samples .8

More generally, decisions about which covariates to include and how best to adjust for them 

(i.e., choice of functional form, including use of nonlinear terms or interactions) can have major 

effects on precision and power. These decisions should be pre -specifie d; yet , the optimal 

choices that maximize precision and power are generally unknown before the trial data are 

collected . This tension motivates the use of data -adaptive approaches, including machine 

learning methods, that allow the data to inform covariate selection and regression model 

specification , while preserving valid inference for the same marginal effect .

# DATA -ADAPTIVE ADJUSTMENT 

Data -adaptive approaches to covariate adjustment are designed to address these limitations. 

Instead of pre -specifying a specific regression form, these approaches use the trial data to 

guide the selection of covariates and the choice of functional form through a pre -specified 

algorithm. In this way, the adjustment strategy is completely defined before unblinding , while still 

allowing the selected regression model to depend on the data. Concretely, in the above G -

computation procedure, we could replac e the fixed regression in Step 1 with stepwise 

regression to facilitate the selection of covariates with the stronge st predictive value and, 

thereby, improve efficiency over the unadjusted estimator. To further improve efficiency, we 

could consider more flexible methods, such as multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) ,

that can more closely approximate the true conditional mean outcome  𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 , 𝑉 ). To preserv e

the validity of the estimator for the marginal effect of interest , we still want to ensure the final 

outcome regression include s an intercept and a main term for the randomized grou p. In AIPW 

and TMLE, data -adaptive estimation of the known propensity score can lead to further efficiency 

gains compared to approaches relying only on the outcome regression .

A foundational principle enabling data -adaptive adjustment is that the treatment groups are 

randomly assigned. This allows the use of machine learning for flexible estimation to facilitate 

gains in efficiency, while still providing consistent and asymptotically normal estimates under 

standard regularity conditions .20,34 In essence, these conditions require the estimators of the 

outcome regression and the propensity score do not overfi t; o verfitting occurs when the arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

10 

estimator is too responsive to noise, versus underlying relationships. Cross -fitting is 

recommended t o protect against overfitting when using data -adaptive approaches , such as 

penalized regressions , tree -based methods , or ensemble approaches . Cross -fitting refers to a 

sample -splitting procedure where nuisance functions (i.e., the outcome regression and 

propensity score models) are trained on part of the data and evaluated on a different part of the 

data .36,37 

Importantly, using data -adaptive methods for covariate adjustment does not inflate Type I error, 

provided the above regularity conditions are met. The variance of these estimators is typically 

derived via influence curve -based approaches (i.e., sandwich estimators ), as outlined in 

Appendix A .20,30,34,38,39 This approach accounts for the uncertainty introduced by the data -

adaptive process by using the empirical variance of the estimated influence curve , rather than a 

fixed -model likelihood. 

While such approaches to data -adaptive adjustment are fully pre -specified, they are still not 

guaranteed to yield an estimator with lower variance than the unadjusted estimator. Therefore, 

we suggest using fully pre -specified, data -adaptive procedures with the following three desirable 

properties. First, they use data collected in the trial to select the adjustment covariate(s)  𝑉  from 

the larger set of baseline covariates  𝑊  in a way that ensures that precision is improved or, at 

least, not lost as compared to the unadjusted approach for the same estimand. Second, they 

incorporate flexible modeling of the outcome regression to get closer to the true conditional 

mean outcome  𝔼 (𝑌 |𝐴 , 𝑉 ) for maximum gains in efficiency. Third, they yield valid inference under 

no or minimal additional assumptions. 

Four procedures meeting these criteria were developed by members of this working group. 

Building off the principle of Empirical Efficiency Maximization ,40 Balzer and colleagues 

introduced TMLE with Adaptive Pre -specification to use sample -splitting to select the 

adjustment approach that minimized the cross -validated variance estimate. 41  Combining the 

principles of Empirical Efficiency Maximization and Super Learner, 40,42  Zhang and Ma also 

proposed a procedure to data -adaptively select the combination of predictions that minimized 

cross -validated variance estimate. 6 Liu and colleagues introduced COADVISE (covariate 

adjustment with variable selection), which fits the outcome regression separately for each trial 

arm and conducts estimation and inference with AIPW. 9 De Bartolomeis and colleagues arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

11 

proposed Hybrid -AIPW (H -AIPW) to improve precision by combining outcome regression 

estimators fit on data internal to the trial with estimators fit on data external to the trial .10 

While numerous method ological papers have demonstrated the promise of data -adaptive 

approaches to covariate adjustment to improve analytic precision , their application in the 

primary analys is of trials remains limited . Balzer and colleagues  summarized the use of TMLE 

with Adaptive Pre -specification in the primary analysis of 8 recently published trials. 43 These 

were Phase 4 + trials and were designed to evaluate the implementation and real -world 

effectiveness of interventions with established efficacy. In these studies, t he precision gains 

from adaptive adjustment instead of the unadjusted estimator ranged from substantial (64% 

more precise) to none, but with no instances as harm. 43 To the best of our knowledge, there has 

been limited , if any , use of data -adaptive covariate adjustment in the primary analysis of trials 

intended to support regulatory decision -making . Instead, data -adaptive approaches to covariate 

adjustment have more commonly been pre -specified as secondary or sensitivity analyses . In the 

following, we review several persistent concerns regarding covariate adjustment in randomized 

trials, overall and particularly when us ing data -adaptive methods. 

# CONSIDERATIONS FOR COVARIATE ADJUSTMENT 

Here, w e provide practical suggestions on best practices for implementing covariate adjustment 

in trials intended to support regulatory decision -making . We also highlight areas where further 

discussion , methodological development, and regulatory guidance may be needed. 

Stand by Your Estimand 

All trials need a clear definition of the treatment effect (i.e., the causal estimand) and alignment 

between t hat effect and the analysis undertaken . This principle is emphasized in the ICH E9(R1) 

Addendum .13 For the marginal effect considered throughout , a long -standing concern is that 

covariate adjustment may change the target of inference from a marginal effect to a conditional 

effect. This concern is particularly prominent when effects are estimated directly from 

coefficients in outcome regression models for binary or time -to -event endpoints .19,44 However, 

all approach es discussed above incorporate standardization to generate marginal effect 

estimate s, regardless of the outcome -type and even when the outcome regression is non -linear. 

This is true for both fixed and data -adaptive approaches to covariate adjustment .arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

12 

Avoid Bad Bets 

Recent FDA guidance warned of potential precision losses when adjusting for covariates that 

are not, in -fact, prognostic of the outcome .14 This is indeed a legitimate concern in practice . To 

avoid betting on an adjustment approach that may actually harm precision in finite samples ,

data -adaptive approaches built on the principle of Empirical Efficiency Maximization offer an 

attractive alternative .40 As long as the unadjusted estimator is included as a candidate, the 

approaches using Adaptive Pre -specification and Super Learner are guaranteed for each trial 

analysis to be at least as precise as the unadjusted approach for the chosen effect and variance 

criterion ; specifically, they default to the unadjusted approach if none of the candidates using 

covariate adjustment reduce the cross -validated variance estimate .6,8,41  Alternatively , under 

stated conditions and with a calibration step for nonlinear outcome regression models, the 

COADVISE approach guarantees that the AIPW -based estimator is at least as efficient as the 

unadjusted estimator asymptotically .9 Similarly, under mild regularity conditions, H -AIPW 

guarantee s asymptotic efficiency at least as great as that of the estimator using only data 

internal to the trial (including possibly the unadjusted estimator) , even under model 

misspecification .10 

Pre -specification or Bust! 

The approach for evaluating treatment efficacy must be pre -specified . This principle is 

emphasized by b oth the EMA and FDA .12,14 The trial’s Protocol and/or Statistical Analysis Plan 

must detail the exact algorithm for point estimation and inference. Use of data -adaptive 

procedures are completely compatible with this recommendation. It is essential to specify the 

estimand, the candidate approaches to covariate adjustment, as well as the exact procedures 

for selection among those candidates and for obtaining a final point and variance estimate . This 

ensures that the analysis is reproducible and not influenced by knowledge of the treatment 

effect .

A related concern with data -adaptive adjustment is that researchers will “snoop”: use the 

unblinded data to select the analytic approach that maximizes the effect estimate . This danger 

is avoided when the analytic approach for effect estimation – adjusted or not – is fully pre -

specified prior to unblinding. We also recommend that corresponding computing code be 

“locked” prior to unblinding and prior to examining any post -baseline data by group. We note 

that this recommendation does not imply that covariate or functional form selection must be arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

13 

performed in a way that is blinded to treatment assignment. Blinded selection is unnecessarily 

restrictive and may forgo potential efficiency gains. As previously discussed, data -adaptive 

estimation of the outcome regression and known propensity score with the full, unblinded data 

does no t compromis e validity of effect estimation or inference. Thus, when properly pre -

specified and implemented, unblinded data -adaptive adjustment can safely improve precision 

rather than degrade it. 

Ready; Set; Reproduce! 

A related concern with covariate adjustment, particularly when using machine learning, is the 

potential loss of reproducibility. Strict adherence to pre -specification practices can help mitigate 

this issue, especially when the tuning parameters of all algorithms ar e explicitly stated. 

Nonetheless, data -adaptive approaches involving stochastic elements can yield different results 

when the analysis is rerun. At minimum, we recommend pre -specifying and setting the random 

seed within the statistical software (e.g., set.seed() in R), recording the exact versions of all 

software dependencies (e.g., renv () in R), using code containerization (e.g., Docker ) to save 

operating system and system libraries , and archiving all computing code. We also recommend 

making all analytic code publicly available on GitHub or similar platforms. As covariate 

adjustment becomes more widely adopted, standardized and well -validated software will further 

support consistent and reproducible analyses. For example, dedicated packages such as 

RobinCar2 , HAIPW, and Coadvise implement covariate -adjusted estimators within transparent 

and reproducible workflows – helping investigators apply these methods in a manner consistent 

with pre -specification requirements .10,45,46 

Don’t Double -Dip; Cross -fit 

Another persistent concern is “double -dipping”, which arises when the same data are used to 

select the adjustment approach and to evaluate the treatment effect . The core concern is that 

such an approach leads to variance underestimation and inflated Type -I error rates. Under 

reasonable conditions, AIPW and TMLE remain consistent and asymptotically normal even 

when using machine learning, and the standard approach to variance estimation accounts for 

the uncertainty added due to data -adaptive learning ( Appendic es A-B). In practice, however, it 

is possible to overfit, especially when attempting to adjust for a large number of covariates 

and/or when using very adaptive learners. A simple solution is to limit the candidates to working 

GLMs adjusting for one covariate .21,22,41 However, this approach might be too conservative in arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

14 

that including more covariates and using more flexible modeling approaches may lead to 

meaningful efficiency gains .8,43 On the other hand, use of more flexible methods may require 

inference based on cross -fitting to separate estimation of nuisance function s (i.e., the outcome 

regression and the propensity score ) from estimation of the treatment effect and to stabilize 

finite -sample performance .36,37 As described next , simulations can help inform the se decisions. 

Simulations Can Be Stimulating 

Conducting a simulation study can help to inform trial design (i.e., which baseline covariate s 𝑊 

to collect), pre -specif y the Statistical Analysis Plan, confirm expected performance of the 

primary analytic approach prior to unblinding , and convince stakeholders of the benefit of 

modern analytic approaches . These simulations should be as realistic as possible in that they 

reflect the key characteristics of the trial, such as the sample size, outcome rarity, as well as the 

expected number and strength of the covariates .47 While software or implementation limitations 

may make it challenging for some research groups to conduct in -depth simulations , we have 

found the approach invaluable . Furthermore, recent advances in generative AI may facilitate 

more widespread use of realistic simulations to inform trial design and analysis .48 

Communication Is Key 

We acknowledge and appreciate that buy -in from all stakeholders is core to implementing novel 

methods in practice . Clear articulation of the estimand, the algorithm, and its expected 

performance is as important as the choice of the method itself. Furthermore, w hen machine 

learning algorithms are used, the resulting analytic procedure can become opaque to readers, 

reviewers, and regulators, especially if the modeling process is not clearly documented or 

reported. We recommend that in addition to publishing the St atistical Analysis Plan and analytic 

code, the main results paper should report the final approach to covariate adjustment. This 

includes the specific adjustment sets, the functional form of the outcome regression and 

propensity score model as well as the procedure by which they were selected. If ensemble 

methods, like Super Learner ,42 are used, the weight given to each algorithm should be provided. 

We also recommend reporting the results from the unadjusted analysis and the efficiency gains 

from adjustment. Such disclosures enhance interpretability and facilitate critical appraisal of the 

analytic choices made. arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

15 

# CONCLUSION 

Covariate adjustment has long been recognized as a principled way to improve precision in 

randomized trials without compromising the protection afforded by randomization. For over a 

decade, regulatory agencies such as the EMA have endorsed adjustment for a small set of pre -

specified prognostic variables, and recent FDA guidance further clarifies that covariate -adjusted 

analyses are appropriate — and often desirable — when procedures are defined in 

advance .12,14 These statements reflect an emerging consensus that efficiency gains should be 

pursued whenever they can be achieved without changing the target estimand or compromising 

the statistical validity. Regulatory guidance emphasizes pre -specification of the analysis 

strategy, selection of clinically and prognostically relevant baseline covariates, and use of 

methods that preserve Type 1 error control. 

The recent FDA guidance describes the G -computation approach using fixed GLMs, but does 

not cover doubly robust approaches or the use of machine learning. Indeed, the landscape of 

available methods has evolved. Restricting adjustment to a fixed and limited set of covariates 

may leave meaningful efficiency gains unrealized, particularly in large trials with rich baseline or 

historical data. Approaches like AIPW and TMLE provide a principled way to data -adaptively 

leverage this information, while maintaining valid inference. In randomized trials, these 

approaches can be viewed as model -assisted methods us ing flexible prediction to improve 

precision , while retaining the design -based protection of randomization. When fully pre -

specified, implemented appropriat ely , and transparently reported, these methods preserve the 

core requirements of biopharmaceutical research: robustness, integrity, interpretability, 

reproducibility, and control of Type I error. 

In conclusion, we suggest that sponsors, investigators, and regulators view data -adaptive 

adjustment not as an experimental add -on, but as a natural extension of established practices 

for covariate adjustment. With thoughtful design, transparent reporting, and continued dialogue 

across academia, industry, and regulatory agencies, these methods can responsibly enhance 

the precision and reliability of trial evidence. We also emphasize that our discussion has 

focused specifically on covariate adjustment for primary efficacy analyses and does not address 

several related complexities, including censored outcome s and intercurrent events , nor the 

integration of these methods within adaptive or sequential trial designs. We also focused on 

covariate adjustment using only the trial data and did not consider approaches integrating arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

16 

external data into the effect estimates (e.g., 49,50 ). These areas warrant separate methodological 

consideration and remain important directions for future work and discussion . Continued 

methodological research and applied experience will further clarify best practices, but the path 

forward is clear: principled, pre -specified, data -adaptive adjustment has an important role to 

play in the next generation of confirmatory clinical trials. 

# Appendix A – On Statistical Inference 

In the main text, we outlined how to obtain a point estimate with either an unadjusted approach 

(i.e. , by comparing the average outcome in each randomized group ) or the G -computation 

approach . We also discussed doubly robust estimators , such as AIPW and TMLE, which 

combine estimates of the outcome regression and known propensity score. Due to 

randomization of the treatment group, all estimators are generally consistent for marginal 

effects . Here , we outline how to obtain statistical inference. 

Suppose, for example, we are interested in the effect on the additive scale and using an 

influence curve -based (i.e., sandwich) inference .20,30,34,38,39 For the unadjusted estimator, the 

estimated influence curve for participant  𝑖  is

𝐼𝐶 ̂𝑖 = 1(𝐴 𝑖 =1) 

> ℙ̂(𝐴 =1)

[𝑌 𝑖 − 𝔼 ̂ (𝑌 |𝐴 = 1)] − 1(𝐴 𝑖 =0) 

> ℙ̂(𝐴 =0)

[𝑌 𝑖 − 𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 = 0)].

For G -computation incorporating adjustment for covariate(s)  𝑉  through the outcome regression, 

the estimated influence curve for participant  𝑖  is                                             

> 𝐼𝐶 ̂𝑖 =1(𝐴 𝑖 =1)
> ℙ̂(𝐴 =1)[𝑌 𝑖 −𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 =1,𝑉 𝑖 )]−1(𝐴 𝑖 =0)
> ℙ̂(𝐴 =0)[𝑌 𝑖 −𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 =0,𝑉 𝑖 )]+𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 =1,𝑉 𝑖 )−𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 =0,𝑉 𝑖 )−𝜑 ̂

where  𝜑 ̂ denotes the point estimate. For doubly robust estimators, such as AIPW or TMLE, 

in corporating additional adjustment in the propensity score , the estimated influence curve for 

participant  𝑖  as                                     

> 𝐼𝐶 ̂𝑖 =1(𝐴 𝑖 =1)
> ℙ̂(𝐴 =1|𝑉 𝑖 )[𝑌 𝑖 −𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 =1,𝑉 𝑖 )]−1(𝐴 𝑖 =0)
> ℙ̂(𝐴 =0|𝑉 𝑖 )[𝑌 𝑖 −𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 =0,𝑉 𝑖 )]+𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 =1,𝑉 𝑖 )−𝔼 ̂(𝑌 |𝐴 =0,𝑉 𝑖 )−𝜑 ̂

.

If we were interested in effects on other scales (e.g., relative effects), the influence curve would 

have a different form, but the core components would be the same. arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

17 

For the unadjusted estimator or approaches using fixed adjustment, a variance estimate is 

obtained from the empirical variance of the estimate d influence curve scaled by total sample 

size  𝑁 :         

> 𝜎 ̂2=𝑉𝑎𝑟 ̂(𝐼𝐶 ̂)
> 𝑁 =1
> 𝑁 2∑𝐼 𝐶 𝑖 2̂
> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =1

where the last equality holds because the estimated influence curve is centered (i.e., its 

empirical mean is approximately 0 ). When using data -adaptive methods , this approach to 

variance estimation can be used when the standard regularity conditions are met, as discussed 

in the main text . However, obtaining a cross -fitted inference is often recommended when using 

data -adaptive procedures. Briefly , the nuisance functions (e.g., the outcome regression and 

propensity score ) are estimated on training samples that exclude the observation being 

evaluated. The influence curve is then calculated using these cross -fitted estimates, and a

variance estimate is obtained from the empirical variance of the cross -fitted influence -curve 

values divided by sample size  𝑁 .

We then use the point estimate  𝜑 ̂ and the variance estimate  𝜎 ̂ 2 to form Wald -type 95% 

confidence intervals and to carry out hypothesis tests in the usual way. If the outcome 

regression is misspecified , it has often been stated that the resulting inference will typically be 

conservative .34 However, as discussed in Appendix B, recent research suggests that inference 

for several common estimators is asymptotically exact even when machine learning is used, 

provided the regularity conditions are satisfied .7,51 

For many estimators , nonparametric bootstrap methods can also be used to obtain confidence 

intervals and p -values. Both influence curve -based inference and the nonparametric bootstrap 

are justified by asymptotic theory. The bootstrap is often convenient to implement and can 

approximate the sampling distribution of complex estimators without explicit derivation of an 

influen ce curve. However, for common estimators , such as the difference in mean outcome s,

the influence curve yields a simple closed -form variance estimator (above), which is 

algebraically equivalent to the usual two -sample variance estimator. We also note that the bias -

corrected and accelerated bootstrap sometimes provides improved finite -sample performance 

as compared to simple Wald intervals .3arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

18 

# Appendix B – Asymptotically e xact inference 

Recent research demonstrates that influence curve -based variance estimation can provide 

asymptotically exact inference even when the outcome regression model is misspecifie d. 7,51 For 

time -to -event and ordinal outcomes, TMLEs that incorporate covariate adjustment in the 

outcome model via machine learning methods , such as LASSO , Random Forests, and 

XGBoost , can achieve asymptotically exact Type 1 error control and valid confidence intervals 

under very general conditions . In other words, they provide asymptotically exact inference as 

long as the machine learning models converge to some limit, not necessarily the true conditional 

mean outcome . Extensions of these results show that combining cross -fitting with bias -robust 

modeling techniques further ensures asymptotically exact inference across a broader range of 

endpoints and estimation strategies, effectively bridging regulatory requirements and modern 

efficiency -oriented procedures . Other AIPW -type estimators that incorporate covariates in the 

outcome regression model via machine learning methods need a slightly adapted influence 

curve .51 

# Acknowledgments: 

We would like to thank the sponsors and attendees of the FIORD workshop, including the 

Forum for Collaborative Research and the Center for Targeted Machine Learning and Causal 

Inference (both at the School of Public Health at the University of California, Berkeley), and the 

Joint Initiative for Causal Inference. 

# Funding statement :

This research was funded by a gift from the Novo Nordisk corporation to the University of 

California, Berkeley, to support the Joint Initiative for Causal Inference. 

# Disclosures: 

The contents are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of, nor 

an endorsement by , the FDA/HHS, the US Government, or the authors’ affiliations. Indeed, this 

paper represents the views of the authors and should not be interpreted as FDA policy or 

guidance beyond what is explicitly stated in the published FDA 2023 guidance document .arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

19 

The authors report generative AI was not used in their research or preparation of this 

manuscript). 

# Competing Interests :

DA works for and owns stocks in a pharmaceutical company. 

CBP is an employee of Novo Nordisk and holds shares in Novo Nordisk. 

ZZ is employed by and holds shares in Gilead Sciences, Inc. 

# References: 

1. Tsiatis AA, Davidian M, Zhang M, Lu X. Covariate adjustment for two -sample treatment 

comparisons in randomized clinical trials: A principled yet flexible approach. Stat Med .

2008;27(23):4658 -4677. doi:10.1002/sim.3113 

2. Rosenblum M, van der Laan MJ. Simple, Efficient Estimators of Treatment Effects in 

Randomized Trials Using Generalized Linear Models to Leverage Baseline Variables. Int J 

Biostat . 2010;6(1):Article 13. doi:10.2202/1557 -4679.1138 

3. Benkeser D, Díaz I, Luedtke A, Segal J, Scharfstein D, Rosenblum M. Improving Precision 

and Power in Randomized Trials for COVID -19 Treatments Using Covariate Adjustment, for 

Binary, Ordinal, and Time -to -Event Outcomes. Biometrics . 2021;77(4):1467 -1481. 

4. Van Lancker K, Bretz F, Dukes O. Covariate adjustment in randomized controlled trials: 

General concepts and practical considerations. Clin Trials . 2024;21(4):399 -411. 

doi:10.1177/17407745241251568 

5. Fisher RA. Statistical Methods for Research Workers . 4th ed. Oliver and Boyd Ltd.; 1932. 

6. Zhang Z, Ma S. Machine learning methods for leveraging baseline covariate information to 

improve the efficiency of clinical trials. Stat Med . 2019;38(10):1703 -1714. 

doi:10.1002/sim.8054 

7. Williams N, Rosenblum M, Díaz I. Optimising precision and power by machine learning in 

randomised trials with ordinal and time -to -event outcomes with an application to COVID -19. 

J R Stat Soc Ser A Stat Soc . Published online September 23, 2022. doi:10.1111/rssa.12915 

8. Balzer LB, Cai E, Godoy Garraza L, Amaranath P. Adaptive selection of the optimal strategy 

to improve precision and power in randomized trials. Biometrics . 2024;80(1):ujad034. 

doi:10.1093/biomtc/ujad034 arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

20 

9. Liu Y, Zhu K, Han L, Yang S. COADVISE: covariate adjustment with variable selection in 

randomized controlled trials. J R Stat Soc Ser A Stat Soc . Published online November 4, 

2025:qnaf171. doi:10.1093/jrsssa/qnaf171 

10. De Bartolomeis P, Abad J, Wang G, et al. Efficient Randomized Experiments Using 

Foundation Models. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst . 2025;38. 

11. ICH. Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials E9 . 1998. 

12. EMA. Guideline on Adjustment for Baseline Covariates in Clinical Trials . 2015. 

13. ICH. ICH E9 (R1) Addendum on Estimands and Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials to the 

Guideline on Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials . European Medicines Agency; 2020. 

14. FDA. Adjusting for Covariates in Randomized Clinical Trials for Drugs and Biological 

Products Guidance for Industry . 2023. https://www.fda.gov/media/148910/download 

15. Bloniarz A, Liu H, Zhang CH, Sekhon JS, Yu B. Lasso adjustments of treatment effect 

estimates in randomized experiments. Proc Natl Acad Sci . 2016;113(27):7383 -7390. 

doi:10.1073/pnas.1510506113 

16. Wu E, Gagnon -Bartsch JA. The LOOP Estimator: Adjusting for Covariates in Randomized 

Experiments. Eval Rev . 2018;42(4):458 -488. doi:10.1177/0193841X18808003 

17. Guo K, Basse G. The Generalized Oaxaca -Blinder Estimator. J Am Stat Assoc .

2023;118(541):524 -536. doi:10.1080/01621459.2021.1941053 

18. Pei X, Zhao Y, Yu J, Wang L, Zhu H. A family of Bayesian prognostic and predictive 

covariate -adjusted response -adaptive randomization designs. Stat Methods Med Res .

2025;34(9):1838 -1850. doi:10.1177/09622802251335150 

19. Daniel R, Zhang J, Farewell D. Making apples from oranges: Comparing noncollapsible 

effect estimators and their standard errors after adjustment for different covariate sets. Biom 

J. 2021;63(3):528 -557. doi:10.1002/bimj.201900297 

20. van der Vaart AW. Asymptotic Statistics . Cambridge University Press; 1998. 

21. Miettinen OS. Stratification by a multivariate confounder score. Am J Epidemiol .

1976;104(6):609 -620. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112339 

22. Schuler A, Walsh D, Hall D, et al. Increasing the efficiency of randomized trial estimates via 

linear adjustment for a prognostic score. Int J Biostat . 2022;18(2):329 -356. doi:10.1515/ijb -

2021 -0072 

23. Robins JM. A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with sustained exposure 

periods –application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Math Model .

1986;7:1393 -1512. doi:10.1016/0270 -0255(86)90088 -6

24. Scharfstein DO, Rotnitzky A, Robins JM. Adjusting for Nonignorable Drop -Out Using 

Semiparametric Nonresponse Models (with Rejoiner). J Am Stat Assoc . 1999;94(448):1096 -

1120 (1135 -1146). doi:10.2307/2669930 arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

21 

25. Wooldridge JM. Inverse probability weighted estimation for general missing data problems. 

J Econom . 2007;141(2):1281 -1301. doi:10.1016/j.jeconom.2007.02.002 

26. Bannick MS, Shao J, Liu J, Du Y, Yi Y, Ye T. A general form of covariate adjustment in 

clinical trials under covariate -adaptive randomization. Biometrika . 2025;112(3):asaf029. 

doi:10.1093/biomet/asaf029 

27. White IR, Thompson SG. Adjusting for partially missing baseline measurements in 

randomized trials. Stat Med . 2005;24(7):993 -1007. doi:10.1002/sim.1981 

28. Zhao A, Ding P. To Adjust or not to Adjust? Estimating the Average Treatment Effect in 

Randomized Experiments with Missing Covariates. J Am Stat Assoc . 2024;119(545):450 -

460. doi:10.1080/01621459.2022.2123814 

29. Robins JM, Rotnitzky A, Zhao LP. Estimation of regression coefficients when some 

regressors are not always observed. J Am Stat Assoc . 1994;89(427):846 -866. 

30. van der Laan MJ, Robins JM. Unified Methods for Censored Longitudinal Data and 

Causality . Springer -Verlag; 2003. 

31. Williamson EJ, Forbes A, White IR. Variance reduction in randomised trials by inverse 

probability weighting using the propensity score. Stat Med . 2014;33(5):721 -737. 

doi:10.1002/sim.5991 

32. Hahn J. On the Role of the Propensity Score in Efficient Semiparametric Estimation of 

Average Treatment Effects. Econometrica . 1998;2:315 -331. doi:10.2307/2998560 

33. van der Laan MJ, Rubin DB. Targeted Maximum Likelihood Learning. Int J Biostat .

2006;2(1):Article 11. doi:10.2202/1557 -4679.1043 

34. van der Laan M, Rose S. Targeted Learning: Causal Inference for Observational and 

Experimental Data . Springer; 2011. 

35. Díaz I. Machine learning in the estimation of causal effects: targeted minimum loss -based 

estimation and double/debiased machine learning. Biostatistics . 2019;21(2):353 -358. 

doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxz042 

36. Zheng W, van der Laan MJ. Cross -Validated Targeted Minimum -Loss -Based Estimation. In: 

van der Laan MJ, Rose S, eds. Targeted Learning: Causal Inference for Observational and 

Experimental Data . Springer Series in Statistics. Springer; 2011:459 -474. 

37. Chernozhukov V, Chetverikov D, Demirer M, et al. Double/debiased machine learning for 

treatment and structural parameters. Published online 2018. 

38. Bickel PJ, Klaassen CAJ, Ritov Y, Wellner JA. Efficient and Adaptive Estimation for 

Semiparametric Models . Johns Hopkins University Press; 1993. 

39. Tsiatis AA. Semiparametric Theory and Missing Data . Springer; 2006. arXiv v1 (29 -July 2026) 

22 

40. Rubin DB, van der Laan MJ. Empirical efficiency maximization: improved locally efficient 

covariate adjustment in randomized experiments and survival analysis. Int J Biostat .

2008;4(1):Article 5. doi:10.2202/1557 -4679.1084 

41. Balzer L, van der Laan MJ, Petersen M, SEARCH Collaboration. Adaptive Pre -specification 

in Randomized Trials With and Without Pair -Matching. Stat Med . 2016;35(10):4528 -4545. 

42. van der Laan MJ, Polley EC, Hubbard AE. Super Learner. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol .

2007;6(1):Article 25. doi:10.2202/1544 -6115.1309 

43. Balzer LB, van der Laan MJ, Petersen ML. Machine learning to optimize precision in the 

analysis of randomized trials: A journey in pre -specified, yet data -adaptive learning. Clin 

Trials . Published online February 28, 2026. doi:10.1177/17407745261417227 

44. Robinson LD, Jewell NP. Some Surprising Results about Covariate Adjustment in Logistic 

Regression Models. Int Stat Rev . 1991;59(2):227 -240. 

45. Liu Y. Coadvise. Published online 2024. Accessed February 15, 2026. 

https://github.com/yiliu1998/Coadvise 

46. Li L, Bannick M, Bove DS, et al. RobinCar2: ROBust INference for Covariate Adjustment in 

Randomized Clinical Trials. Published online January 9, 2026. Accessed February 15, 

2026. https://cran.r -project.org/web/packages/RobinCar2/index.html 

47. Nance N, Petersen ML, van der Laan M, Balzer LB. The Causal Roadmap and Simulations 

to Improve the Rigor and Reproducibility of Real -data Applications. Epidemiol Camb Mass .

2024;35(6):791 -800. doi:10.1097/EDE.0000000000001773 

48. Dahabreh IJ, Yeh RW, De Bartolomeis P. Trial Emulation, Simulation, and Augmentation 

Using Electronic Health Records and Generative AI. NEJM AI . 2025;2(10):AIe2500894. 

doi:10.1056/AIe2500894 

49. Qiu S, Barr C, Dang L, et al. Considerations for the Integration of Randomized Controlled 

Trials and Real -World Data. Preprint posted online April 11, 2026:arXiv:2604.10308. 

Accessed July 29, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.10308v1 

50. Karlsson R, Wang G, De Bartolomeis P, Krijthe JH, Dahabreh IJ. Robust integration of 

external control data in randomized trials. arXiv.org. June 25, 2024. Accessed July 29, 

2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.17971v4 

51. Van Lancker K, Díaz I, Vansteelandt S. Automated, efficient and model -free inference for 

randomized clinical trials via data -driven covariate adjustment. arXiv . Preprint posted online 

April 17, 2024:arXiv:2404.11150. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2404.11150