Title: 2607.27593v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.27593v1

Published Time: Fri, 31 Jul 2026 00:22:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
Asymptotic emergence of statistically supported false causal interpretation under 

unmeasured confounding 

Mark Louie F. Ramos, Ph.D. 

Department of Health Policy and Administration, The Pennsylvania State University, 

University Park, PA mlr6219@psu.edu 

Abstract 

Unmeasured confounding is widely recognized as a limitation of observational causal 

inference, but its implications for data -driven causal discovery are often understated. We 

provide an asymptotic characterization of this limitation. When the true causal v ariable is 

unobserved but correlated proxy variables are available, increasing sample size while 

searching for increasingly stable , data -driven causal structures will make associations 

involving observable proxies become increasingly certain. This result highlights a 

fundamental distinction between reducing statistical uncertainty and recovering causal 

mechanisms: more data can improve certainty about genuine relationships within the 

observed variable space while providing no guarantee of identifying the underlying causal 

structure .Introduction 

As observational causal inference methods become more common across applied fields, 

communicating their assumptions and the limits of what they can establish is increasingly 

critical . Well -understood in causal inference theory is that observational causal methods 

do not determine whether a proposed cause –effect relationship holds. Rather, they 

assume a causal structure, typically formalized through tools such as directed acyclic 

graphs (DAGs ), instrumental variables, or quasi ‑experimental designs, and estimate causal 

effects conditional on those assumptions (Hernan & Robins, 2024; Pearl, 2014) .

Several results stem from this principle. For example, it has been shown that different 

causal models can be empirically indistinguishable (Verma & Pearl, 1991) . This means 

that, in practice, observational data alone cannot determine which causal structure 

generated the data. Connected to this, it has been discussed that statistical tests in 

observational causal analyses evaluate properties of an assumed causal model , and are 

not meant to test the validity of the causal structure itself (Greenland et al., 1999) . Another 

well -known result is the issue of unmeasured confounding, such that i f there exist 

unobserved common causes of treatment and outcome, then causal effects cannot, in 

general, be recovered from observational data alone (Shpitser, 2020) .

Despite the wide publication of these results, problems rooted to sufficient appreciation of 

the importance of these assumptions are commonplace. Application of causal inference 

on observational settings frequently proceed without clearly stating or defending the 

identifying assumptions on which they rely (Hernan & Robins, 2024) . A systematic review 

found that assumptions encode d by researchers in their DAGs about the data ‑generating 

process are often left implicit or under ‑reported (Tennant et al., 2021) .

This paper contributes a result that shows a complementary perspective to the theoretical 

discussion of unmeasured confounding. We consider the setting in which the true causal 

relationship is fundamentally unobservable, yet the demand for causal answers motivates 

the collection of increasingly rich observational datasets. As observational datasets grow 

richer and estimation becomes more precise, workflows that map statistical association to 

causal interpretation will inevitably support variables with stable, statistically significant 

effects, even when none of those variables are causal parents of the outcome. 

The purpose of this exposition is not to introduce new results on causal identification nor to 

discourage the use of observational causal inference methods , but to underscore the 

underappreciated point that observational causal inference must begin with convincing 

assumptions about which the purpose is measurement, not validation . The operative question is not Does X cause Y? But rather suppose X causes Y, what is the magnitude of 

that effect? 

Setup 

(1)  Let  𝑉  be the set of all variables in the universe and  𝐺 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 be the true directed acyclic 

graph ( DAG ) over  𝑉 .

(2)  Let  𝑂 ⊂ 𝑉 be the set of observable variables. 

(3)  Let t here exist  𝑋 , 𝑌 ∈ 𝑉 such that  𝑋 → 𝑌  in  𝐺 true  with total effect  𝜌 , and  𝑋 ∉ 𝑂 .

(4)  Let t here exist a sequence {𝑍 𝑗 }𝑗 =1 

> ∞

⊂ 𝑂 ∖ {𝑌 } such that:  

> •

𝑋 → 𝑍 𝑗  in  𝐺 true for all  𝑗 , 

> •

there is no edge  𝑍 𝑗 → 𝑌  in  𝐺 true for any  𝑗 , 

> •

Cov (𝑋 , 𝑍 𝑗 ) ≠ 0 for all  𝑗  and  Cov (𝑍 𝑗 , 𝑌 ) ≠ 0. (i.e.  𝑍 𝑗  is a non -causal proxy of  𝑋 ) 

> •

Each  𝑍 𝑗  is a candidate focal variable when observed 

(5)  Let {𝑂 𝑘 }𝑘 =1 

> ∞

be increasing subsets of  𝑂  with ⋃ 𝑂 𝑘 𝑘 ⊃ {𝑍 1, 𝑍 2, … }. For each  𝑘 , let  𝑛  be 

the sample size of i.i.d. data from the marginal distribution over (𝑌 , 𝑂 𝑘 ).

(6)  For each  𝑘 , 𝑛 , a procedure  𝒜 𝑘 ,𝑛 takes the data on (𝑌 , 𝑂 𝑘 ) and, for any focal variable s

𝑊 i,𝑘 ∈ 𝑂 𝑘 it tests, us ing : 

> •

a consistent estimator of  𝜃 i, the association between  𝑊 i,𝑘  and  𝑌 , which is 

interpreted as a causal effect under the assumed DAG.  

> •

a standard test of  𝐻 0: 𝜃 i = 0 vs  𝐻 1: 𝜃 i ≠ 0, 

> •

If the test rejects, it is interpret ed as “ 𝑊 i,𝑘  (at least partly) causes  𝑌 ” under the 

assumption of no unmeasured confounding between  𝑊 and  𝑌 .

Claim 

For a sufficiently large  𝑘 , Pr (𝒜 𝑘 ,𝑛 concludes 𝑍 𝑗 →𝑌 ) → 

> 𝑛 →∞

1.

Proof 

Statement 1: Pr (𝑊 𝑘 ∈ {𝑍 1, 𝑍 2, … }) → 

> 𝑘 →∞

1

Reason: By construction, {𝑂 𝑘 } in  𝒜 𝑘 ,𝑛  is increasing and ⋃ 𝑂 𝑘 𝑘  contains all  𝑍 𝑗 , so for large  𝑘 ,

at least one  𝑍 𝑗 is in  𝑂 𝑘 . Since every  𝑍 𝑗  is a candidate focal variable, once they are in  𝑂 𝑘 , they 

are included as one of the hypothesis tests for  𝒜 𝑘 ,𝑛 .

Statemen t 2: For  𝑍 𝑗  of interest in  𝒜 𝑘 ,𝑛  , Cov (𝑍 𝑗 , 𝑌 ) = 𝜃 𝑖 ≠ 0

Reason: Given (4) 

Statement 3:  Pr (𝒜 𝑘 ,𝑛 rejects 𝐻 0: 𝜃 𝑖 = 0 ) → 

> 𝑛 →∞

1.

Reason: Definition of statistical power and consistent estimators 

Statement 4: For a sufficiently large  𝑘  (such that  𝑍 𝑗 ∈ 𝑂 𝑘  for some  𝑗 ), Pr (𝒜 𝑘 ,𝑛 concludes 

𝑍 𝑗 →𝑌 ) → 

> 𝑛 →∞

1.

Reason: Follows from Statement 3 and Given (6) 

Discussion 

Except for the characteristic that  𝑋 ∉ 𝑂 , t he setup mirrors common, good -faith practice in 

scientific research with observational data. Researchers typically begin with a substantive 

outcome of interest  𝑌 and a hypothesized causal factor, informed by theory, prior literature, 

or rational plausibility. Just because the true cause  𝑋  is unobservable , even unknown, does 

not mean there is a dearth of  𝑍 𝑗 ’s that are, themselves, plausible causes of  𝑌  even if none 

of them actually are . This is not new and is in fact the thrust of results around unmeasured 

confounding. What my result makes explicit is that in this scenario, statistical principles 

will continue to apply on the estimators regardless if their estimands are truly causal ,

partial causal , or non -causal effects. Moreover, as datasets become “better” in terms of 

both how many features we are able to capture about the data generating process 

(𝑖 . 𝑒 . {𝑂 𝑘 }𝑘 →∞) and how precise we are at estimating estimands given those features (i.e. 

{𝒜 𝑘 ,𝑛 }𝑛 →∞), we will inevitably find statistically sound evidence of association that will 

incorrectly be concluded as causal association. This result is not meant to discourage the 

use of observational causal inference methods , it is only emphasizing that there are two, 

equally important parts to it and statistical analysis of observational data only plays a role 

in the latter part. The first part, declaring assumptions about the underlying causal 

structure, is entirely informed by prior knowledge, which may include insights from 

previous results of statistical inference, but not validated by subsequent statistical inference on the present study’s data . Rather, statistical inference is made conditioned on 

those assumptions being true. Thus, regardless of the results that follow from estimation 

and testing, those assumptions remain as reasonable (or unreasonable) as they were prior 

to estimation. What st atistical analysis provides is that stakeholders now have an estimate 

of what the causal effect might be suppose the assumptions made are true. 

It is important to point out that this is not a statistical issue . That is, it does not stem from 

poor practice of Type 1 error rate control like in issues of p -hacking, data dredging, cherry -

picking, or failure to account for multiple comparisons which are known to negatively 

impact the quality of statistical inference (Wasserstein & Lazar, 2016) . In fact, since 

Cov (𝑋 , 𝑍 𝑗 ) ≠ 0 and  Cov (𝑍 𝑗 , 𝑌 ) ≠ 0 for all  𝑗 , replicating {𝒜 𝑘 ,𝑛 } that rejected its  𝐻 0: 𝜃 i = 0 at 

the same or higher sample size is likely to result in the same outcome. That is, the results 

are more likely to be replicated than not , since the association is actually real, it’s just not 

causal. 

It is likewise critical to distinguish between assumptions necessary to do the first part of 

observational causal inference versus statistical assumptions made when doing the latter 

part. Whereas neither class of assumptions are exactly verifiable, statistical assumptions 

tend to be more robust, such that the impact of violations on inference depends on the 

gravity of the violation s which are, to some extent, perceptible from the data . As such, 

so ‑called “validation ” procedures are reasonably sufficient to rule out egregious issues . For 

example, the basic t ‑test requires the data ‑generating process ( dgp ) to be exactly normally 

distributed to achieve exact , level -alpha control over Type I error. In reality, no dgp is ever 

exactly normal, and normality ‑checking procedures are at best crude diagnostics. Yet the 

t‑test itself is highly robust to violations of normality, such that moderate skew or kurtosis 

typically has only minor effects on inference, especially with adequate sample sizes. In 

contrast, the assumptions of a correctly specified DAG and no unmeasured confounding 

are rigid. While some violations can have minimal impact . F or example, an unmeasured 

confounder may only weakly affect both exposure and outcome such that the estimated 

effect is just biased in magnitude , it is also possible for a hidden cause to entirely drive 

both , making it incorrect to attribute any effect as causal ly contributed by the exposure .

Observational data cannot distinguish between these situations. Sensitivity analyses help 

in quantifying how large a violation would need to be to overturn the estimated effect, but 

they still operate under the assumption that no unmeasured confounder is wholly 

responsible for the observed association instead of the presumed causal variable. 

Naturally, assuming  𝑋 ∉ 𝑂  is overly pessimistic. After all, the point of observational causal 

inference is ultimately to provide recommendation on whether or not it is reasonable to act 

as though implementing changes in  𝑋  causes changes in  𝑌 . It was done to emphasize the point that statistical ly convincing estimation of assumed causal estimands is not just 

possible, but asymptotically likely under increasingly better data regardless of whether the 

estimand is truly causal. 

Ultimately, these results provide an asymptotic characterization of why the standard 

caveat about unmeasured confounding has a stronger consequence than is often 

appreciated. When the true causal variable is unobserved but correlated proxies are 

available, increasing sample size does not resolve the causal ambiguity. Instead, it 

increases statistical confidence in relationships involving the observed proxies. 

Consequently, strategies that seek to discover increasingly stable, data -driven DAGs 

through larger observational datasets can converge toward causal explanations that 

accurately capture associations in the observed data while incorrectly attributing causality 

to proxy variables rather than to the unobserved mechanism. This invites researchers, 

reviewers, and readers to regard observational causal assumptions with at least as much 

care and scrutiny as the data analysis itself. 

References 

Greenland, S., Pearl, J., & Robins, J. M. (1999). Causal diagrams for epidemiologic research. 

Epidemiology , 10 (1), 37 –48. 

Hernan, M. A., & Robins, J. (2024). Causal Inference: What If . Taylor & Francis. 

Pearl, J. (2014). The Science and Ethics of Causal Modeling. In Handbook of Ethics in 

Quantitative Methodology . Routledge. 

https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203840023.ch15 

Shpitser, I. (2020). Identification in Causal Models With Hidden Variables. Journal de La 

Societe Francaise de Statistique (2009) , 161 (1), 91 –119. 

Tennant, P. W. G., Murray, E. J., Arnold, K. F., Berrie, L., Fox, M. P., Gadd, S. C., Harrison, W. 

J., Keeble, C., Ranker, L. R., Textor, J., Tomova, G. D., Gilthorpe, M. S., & Ellison, G. T. 

H. (2021). Use of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) to identify con founders in applied health research: Review and recommendations. International Journal of 

Epidemiology , 50 (2), 620 –632. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyaa213 

Verma, T., & Pearl, J. (1991). Equivalence and Synthesis of Causal Models. Proceedings of 

the Sixth Conference on Uncertainy in A.I. https://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/tech -report/1991 -

reports/910020.pdf#:~:text=Judea%20Pearl,July%2027%2D29%2C%201990%2C% 

20pp.%20220%2D227. 

Wasserstein, R. L., & Lazar, N. A. (2016). The ASA Statement on p -Values: Context, Process, 

and Purpose. The American Statistician , 70 (2), 129 –133. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2016.1154108