Title: Relaxing Faithfulness with Intervention-Only Causal Discovery

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11816v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 03:00:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Relaxing Faithfulness with Intervention-Only Causal Discovery 

Bijan H. S. Mazaheri 1,2 Jiaqi Zhang 2, 3 Caroline Uhler 2, 3 1Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA 

> 2

Schmidt Center, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 

> 3

Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 

# Abstract 

Causal discovery algorithms learn a network that describes the causal dependencies among random variables. A common workflow involves first utiliz-ing conditional independence properties on obser-vational data to determine partially directed causal relationships, then applying interventions to orient the unknown causal directions. A critical assump-tion for the first step is faithfulness: a requirement that causally linked variables exhibit statistical de-pendence. Many natural systems include buffering and stabilizing pathways that cancel out to achieve systemic robustness. This cancellation of pathways violates faithfulness, leading causal discovery al-gorithms to incorrectly remove causal dependen-cies. In this paper, we argue that hard interventions contain information about the presence/absence of causal linkage that is overlooked in the first stage of structure discovery. We show that a mild assump-tion — called intervention-immediacy faithfulness — that allows cancellations, is sufficient to non-parametrically identify causal structures with hard interventions. These results position interventions as the primary carriers of information about causal structure, which should take precedence over con-ditional independence testing. To flip the paradigm, we also specify equivalence classes when the iden-tification criteria are not met due to limitations in the scope of interventions. 

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

Causal Discovery. Structural Causal Models (SCMs), popularized by the works of Pearl [1998, 2009], graphically describe networks of causal dependencies. Causal discov-ery is the task of recovering the underlying causal structure from data, typically in the form of a directed acyclic graph 

(DAG) or a representation of an equivalence class of DAGs, though other targets, such as ancestral graphs with latent variables or cyclic models, are also studied (see Vowels et al. [2022], Squires and Uhler [2023] for reviews). One approach to causal discovery involves a constraint-based 

search guided by conditional independence (“CI-tests”), e.g., the PC-algorithm from Spirtes et al. [2000]. Constraint-based approaches use the observation that variables without a direct causal link can be made independent by condition-ing on variables on intermediary causal paths, known as the causal Markov condition [Pearl, 2009]. Structural causal models imply a data-generating process whereby each random variable is generated from its (causal) parents. These processes are sometimes specified using equations, leading to structural equation models (SEMs). Under these settings, these equations may be restricted us-ing “parametric assumptions” on their functional form and noise. The most popular such assumption is linearity with additive Gaussian noise, yielding a multivariate Gaussian distribution on the full system. Causal discovery algorithms therefore fall under two cate-gories: (1) algorithms that make use of parametric assump-tions on the structural equations, and (2) non -parametric algorithms that only make use of conditional independence and other broad distributional properties. While paramet-ric settings, such as Linear Non-Gaussian Additive Noise Models (LinGAMs) [Shimizu et al., 2006], can sometimes fully recover a single DAG structure, most non-parametric algorithms for causal discovery can only narrow the struc-ture down to what is known as a “Markov equivalence class,” uniquely specified by its conditional independence constraints [Spirtes et al., 2000]. Such a class is usually represented first by an undirected “skeleton,” denoting the 

presence of causal relationships, which is then partially oriented into a completed partial DAG (CP-DAG) [Spirtes et al., 2000]. 

Interventions. To resolve a Markov equivalence class, nonparametric causal discovery algorithms make secondary arXiv:2607.11816v1 [cs.LG] 13 Jul 2026 use of interventions . An intervention (a “perturbation” in biology) is a change to the system that may elicit a change in causally downstream variables, and never elicits a change in any other variables. Such interventions may be “soft”, such as “shift interventions”[Sani et al., 2020], which change a mean while retaining randomness and also retaining depen-dence on causally upstream variables). Real-world examples of soft interventions include CRISPR “gene knockdowns” [Chang et al., 2016] that partially suppress expression. In-terventions may also be “hard”, such as “do interventions” [Pearl, 2009] which interrupt the data-generating process, force random variables to take a specific value, and disso-ciate their dependence from causally upstream variables. Real-world examples of these hard interventions are “gene knock outs ” [Guan et al., 2010], which fully suppress their expression. 

Faithfulness. Under causal sufficiency (no unobserved confounding), a data-generating process given by an SCM will exhibit the causal Markov condition, but the converse is not necessarily true: A causal path between two variables does not necessarily require that they be statistically depen-dent [Ramsey et al., 2012]. “ Faithfulness ” is the assumption that causal links imply statistical dependencies, which gives a two-way correspondence between CI-tests and graphical properties known as “d-separation” [Pearl, 2009]. This no-tion can be relaxed for interventions [Chevalley et al., 2025], requiring only that directed paths exhibit dependence. Violations of both types of faithfulness are often due to “path cancellation,” i.e., dependencies whose effects cancel each other out. While often assumed away, it is important to understand that path cancellations occur by design in engineered and evolutionarily-driven systems. For example, many biochemical pathways are known to be buffered using “compensating paths” [Hartman IV et al., 2001]. Hence, while path cancellations may be unlikely in a randomly selected model for synthetic data, they are very likely in practice due to the formation of control systems. 

Example 1.1. Gene A may directly affect both B, C , but B

may act as a compensating path to stabilize the expression of 

C even when A’s expression is suppressed. As such A → C

and A → B → C cancel out so that changes in A do not elicit changes in C.

Notice that Example 1.1 exhibits path cancellation for both the conditional independence and intervention-based faith-fulness definitions. 

1.1 CONTRIBUTIONS 

In this paper, we show that hard interventions can nonpara-metrically identify causal structures without assumptions that prohibit path cancellation. This result is based on a new notion of faithfulness, “intervention immediacy (II) faith-fulness,” which we contrast with conditional independence (CI) faithfulness. II faithfulness only requires interventional dependence in a node’s “most immediate effects” — effects with only a single path and no opportunity for path cancella-tion (e.g., B for an intervention on A in Example 1.1). While most notions of faithfulness are developed for non-parametric algorithms, 1 analyzing these assumptions in finite-sample regimes requires a parametric framework to quantify “closeness” to a violation. CI faithfulness has been studied under the parametric assumption of a multivariate Gaussian, where relaxation into “ ε-strong (CI) faithfullness” makes the assumption very strong. To compare II faithful-ness and CI faithfulness, we provide a parametric study in the multivariate Gaussian setting and compare our results to those of Uhler et al. [2013]. II faithfulness is significantly milder than CI faithfulness under these metrics. Our results position interventions as superior to CI test-ing, not only for orienting undirected relationships, but also for discovering their presence. This challenges the prevail-ing hierarchy that positions conditional independence as the primary source of causal information for learning the “causal skeleton” and demotes interventions as a secondary refinement. The disruption of the CI/intervention hierarchy suggests a flipped workflow: utilize information from the available interventions first, then refine the intervention equivalence class with conditional independence testing that does not require assumptions beyond II faithfulness. To reorient al-gorithms around intervention-based causal discovery, we define these intervention equivalence classes based on limi-tations of the intervention cardinality. 

1.2 OVERVIEW 

Our algorithm is built on definitions of change sets and II faithfulness, formalized in Section 3. II faithfulness is briefly analyzed in the parametric setting of Gaussian random vari-ables with linear dependencies in Section 4 for the sake of comparison to Uhler et al. [2013]. None of the algorithms in this paper require parametric assumptions. In Section 5 we present two new causal discovery algorithms built on change sets and the assumption of II faithfulness. In this setting, identifiability depends on the number of vari-ables on which we can intervene simultaneously ( k) relative to the maximum local (vertex) connectivity κmax between non-adjacent pairs of the graph (i.e., the largest, over all non-adjacent ordered pairs, of the minimum number of vertices whose removal destroys all directed paths between them). To specify a new “intervention equivalence class,” we define the “ k-robust transitive closure” of G. Informally, starting 

> 1Parametric models use more precise notions tuned to their settings, such as the matrix condition number.

from G and following a topological order (so that acyclicity is preserved), we add an edge Vi → Vj whenever Vi and 

Vj cannot be disconnected by removing fewer than k ver-tices; that is, whenever every vertex cut separating them has size at least k. Under limited cardinality of interventions, DAGs that have the same k-robust transitive closure form an equivalence class, which we cannot distinguish between using ⩽ k-node interventions. We prove two guarantees: (1) a graph is identifiable with O(|V|2) hard interventions on up to κmax + 1 nodes, and (2) under a cardinality limit k

it is identifiable up to its k-robust transitive closure. These equivalence classes provide insight into the information re-dundancies between intervention outcomes and conditional independence testing, and may be further resolved using regular CI tests as secondary sources of information. In Section 6, we perform an empirical study on synthetic data to verify the relative robustness of intervention-only causal discovery. In the absence of real datasets with large-scale interventions, our results motivate the development of new methods for performing multi-node interventions to improve the accuracy of causal discovery. 

1.3 RELATED WORKS Interventions in Causal Discovery. Seminal work by Eberhardt and Scheines [2007] studied the integration of interventions into causal discovery, particularly on orient-ing Markov equivalence classes. Shanmugam et al. [2015] explored limited intervention size when orienting a Markov equivalence class, but not learning the graph. Hauser and Bühlmann [2012] defined interventional Markov equiva-lence classes with respect to intervention sets, then extended this to joint observational and interventional measurements in Hauser and Bühlmann [2015], which provided a critical framework for utilizing an intervention-second approach to causal discovery. Yang et al. [2018] and Kocaoglu et al. [2019] extended this characterization to soft interventions. A large body of modern work integrates observational and interventional data jointly rather than sequentially, including GIES [Hauser and Bühlmann, 2012], IGSP and its vari-ants [Wang et al., 2017, Squires et al., 2020], JCI [Mooij et al., 2020], and score-based continuous-optimization meth-ods such as DCDI [Brouillard et al., 2020]. These methods typically operate offline , pooling a fixed observational sam-ple with a pre-collected pool of interventional data. Our approach is instead online and active , in the tradition of adaptive experimental design for causal discovery [He and Geng, 2008, Shanmugam et al., 2015, Choo et al., 2022]: because the pruning step dynamically searches for a mini-mum vertex cut Z, it designs targeted k-node interventions on the fly. It departs from that line in what the interven-tions are for : prior active methods design interventions to 

orient a skeleton that is still recovered from observational conditional-independence tests, whereas we use interven-tions to establish edge presence , relying on observational CI only as an optional secondary refinement when the inter-vention cardinality is limited—never for the skeleton itself. This is what lets us side-step path cancellation entirely. The work conceptually closest to ours is Chevalley et al. [2025], who introduce intervention faithfulness and use single-variable interventions to recover a causal order; II faithfulness weakens their condition so that it tolerates path cancellation (Lemma 4.3, Theorem 4.4), and our al-gorithms recover full structure rather than only an order-ing. Also closely related, Zhou et al. [2025] characterizes and learns causal graphs from hard interventions in the 

presence of latents via conditional-independence-invariance machinery—complementary to our causally-sufficient but cancellation-tolerant setting. Two further methods are con-trasts rather than close relatives: DCDI (above) assumes standard ( λ-strong) faithfulness, which path cancellation violates, and identifies only up to the interventional Markov equivalence class, whereas our framework is nonparametric and faithfulness-relaxed; and effect identification given a known partial ancestral graph [Jaber et al., 2022] is orthogo-nal, addressing identification rather than structure learning. 

Finite Sample Concerns for Faithfulness. Meek [1995] argued that faithfulness is a relatively mild assumption un-der exact statistics because it has full Lebesgue measure. However, success under finite-sample uncertainty requires a stronger notion — referred to as λ-strong faithfulness [Zhang and Spirtes, 2012] — to ensure that stochastic devi-ations from faithfulness are unlikely. From this perspective, Uhler et al. [2013] showed that faithfulness is a strong as-sumption because the manifold of violations behaves like a space-filling curve. These results are discussed in more detail in Section 2. 

Causal Direction and Structure Learning. Significant recent work has shown that access to a causal ordering, even if such an ordering is searched for, drastically improves the performance of causal discovery. A notable algorithm that searches along permutations is “greedy sparsest permutation” (GSP) [Wang et al., 2017]. See Squires and Uhler [2023] for a review. These approaches are still based on CI testing, but we believe they are the preliminary foundations of a new causal discovery workflow. A related discovery involves improving the number of CI tests utilized by causal discovery by integrating edge-orientation sooner than the original PC algorithm [Shiragur et al., 2024, Monés et al., 2026], which is still CI-based, gleaning orientations from unsheilded collider structures. 

Limiting Testing. Kocaoglu [2023] characterized the equivalence classes of graphs with conditional independence tests with restricted conditioning sets. We similarly charac-terize the equivalence classes of limited interventions .Information Theoretic Causal Discovery. Intervention-based discovery shares many algorithmic similarities with information-theoretic causal discovery [Janzing and Schölkopf, 2010, Xu et al., 2025]. In particular, the algo-rithms in these approaches have a similar structure: they begin by isolating the transitive closure of the true graph and then removing edges. Our work diverges from this ap-proach by focusing on interventions and the responses they elicit within the system. 

# 2 PRELIMINARIES 

2.1 NOTATION 

We will use the capital Roman alphabet to denote random variables (e.g., A, B, C, V ) and the lowercase Roman alpha-bet to denote assignments to those random variables (e.g., 

A = a or just a). Bold will indicate a set of random vari-ables, e.g., V = ( V1, V 2, . . . )⊤, and v is an assignment to V.Parents ( PA ), children ( CH ), ancestors ( AN ), and descen-dants ( DE ) in graphs will also follow these conventions, e.g., PA (V ) = pa v(v), where the assignments to those parents come from values specified in v. We use subscripts to indicate the relevant graph structure, e.g., PA G (V ). We will generally use the Greek alphabet (e.g., α, β ) to repre-sent parameters for structural equations and thresholds to quantify faithfulness. Throughout the paper we assume the causal structure is a DAG and that the system is causally sufficient (no unob-served confounders). We follow the convention that a vertex is not counted among its own ancestors or descendants. The 

transitive closure TC (G) of a DAG G is the graph on the same vertex set that contains a directed edge Vi → Vj when-ever there is a directed path from Vi to Vj in G (equivalently, whenever Vj ∈ DE G (Vi)). The local (vertex) connectivity 

of a non-adjacent ordered pair (Vi, V j ) is the minimum num-ber of vertices whose removal destroys all directed paths from Vi to Vj ; by Menger’s theorem this equals the maxi-mum number of internally vertex-disjoint directed Vi ⇝ Vj

paths. We write κmax for the maximum of this quantity over all non-adjacent ordered pairs. 

2.2 INTERVENTIONS 

An intervention on a variable modifies its natural causal mechanism. In a general setting, multiple distinct interven-tions may exist for a single variable (e.g., setting its value, shifting its mean, etc.). For the purposes of this paper, how-ever, we consider a simplified setting: for each variable 

V ∈ V, there exists a single, unique hard intervention that can be applied. We denote the simultaneous application of this unique intervention to all variables in a set A ⊆ V as 

I(A). This operation severs the dependence between the variables in A and their parents, causing their value to be determined by a new, exogenous mechanism. We denote the resulting probability distribution as PI(A), where P de-notes the observational distribution (i.e., no intervention). All interventions in this paper are hard interventions in this sense. Where we informally speak of a “strong” interven-tion, we mean a hard intervention whose induced change is large enough (relative to the noise) to be detected by a finite-sample two-sample test; this signal magnitude is precisely what the parameter λ quantifies in Section 4. 

2.3 FAITHFULNESS 

D-separation provides a graphical criterion that constitutes a necessary but not sufficient condition for conditional inde-pendence under the causal Markov condition. We say that two variables Vi, V j are d-separated if there is no active path between them in the causal graph. See Pearl [2009] for a more detailed description. To provide intuition about path cancellation, we give an example with linear Gaussian structural equation models (SEMs). CI faithfulness with respect to a causal graph G

corresponds to nonzero covariance for all d-connected pairs. Consider the following example with N1, N 2, N 3 as inde-pendent, zero-mean, unit-variance Gaussians. 

X1 = N1,X2 = α12 X1 + N2,X3 = α13 X1 + α23 X2 + N3.

(1) The covariance between X1 and X3 is a function of the model coefficients: 

Cov( X1, X 3) = α13 + α23 α12 .

A monomial of parameters emerges from each active path between X1 and X3. When α13 + α23 α12 = 0 , we have 

Cov( X1, X 3) = 0 , a CI faithfulness violation. Such vi-olations occur in two ways: (1) trivial coefficients (e.g., 

αij = 0 ) and (2) “cancellation” of monomial terms from multiple paths. 

λ-strong faithfulness [Uhler et al., 2013] requires 

|Cov( Vi, V j )| > λ pVar( Vi)Var( Vj ) for all d-connected 

Vi, V j . Geometrically, violations correspond to distributions close to the hypersurfaces defined by regular CI faithfulness violations. The argument for λ-strong faithfulness stems from finite-sample uncertainty, where true and empirical covariance differ. 

Theorem 2.1 (informal, [Uhler et al., 2013]) . The volume of λ-strong CI faithfulness violations in a linear SEM with coefficients in [−1, 1] is at least ω(λpoly (n)2|E|) in the worst case. 

2.4 INTERVENTION FAITHFULNESS 

Chevalley et al. [2025] introduced a notion of “ ε-strong intervention faithfulness” that formalizes the requirement that intervening on a variable must induce a change on all of its descendants. Such an assumption is still vulnerable to a “cancellation of paths.” For example, in the model from Eq. (1) , when α13 + α23 α12 = 0 , changing X1 will elicit no change in X3, violating this assumption. 

# 3 ASSUMPTIONS AND FRAMEWORK 

To address the problem of path cancellation, we develop intervention immediacy faithfulness (II faithfulness) as a milder and more robust assumption for causal discovery. We also develop intervention locality as a complementary interventional analog to the causal Markov property. 

Definition 3.1 (Most Immediate Child (MIC)) . We say that 

B ∈ V is a “most immediate child” (MIC) of A ∈ V in 

G = ( V, E) if B ∈ CH (A) and there are no other directed paths from A to B.Here “no other directed paths” refers to all directed paths in 

G (of any length), not only paths of length one; equivalently, 

B is a MIC of A if and only if the edge A → B is the 

unique directed path from A to B.

Lemma 3.2. In a DAG, for any vertex V ∈ V, if CH (V )̸ =

∅, then there is always at least one MIC. 

To see the intuition behind Lemma 3.2, consider the fact that any child with more than one path from V must have one path that is longer than length one, which means there is another child earlier in the topological ordering. Repeat this until you find the “most immediate child.” The proof is deferred to Appendix A. II faithfulness is based on the notion of a “change” between different interventional distributions. 

Definition 3.3 (Change Set) . The change set CHG( I(A)) is the set of all variables whose marginal distributions change under an intervention I(A).

CHG( I(A)) := {V ∈ V s.t. PI(A)(v)̸ = P (v)}.

Definition 3.4 (Conditional Change Set) . Let I(A) and 

I(B) be interventions on disjoint sets A and B. The condi-tional change set of I(A) given I(B) is the set of variables whose distributions change when adding the intervention 

I(A) to the existing intervention I(B).

CHG( I(A) | I(B)) := {V ∈ V | PI(A∪B)(v)̸ = PI(B)(v)}.

Conditional change sets arise naturally in sequential experi-mentation: a canonical example is sequential gene knock-outs, where a first knockout I(B) removes upstream regula-tory effects so that the effect of a second knockout I(A) can be attributed to the paths that remain. This mechanism is what step 2 of our algorithms exploits. A change set may in-clude descendants of the intervened variables, as well as the intervened variables themselves. However, it cannot include non-descendants. 

Definition 3.5 (Intervention Locality) . I(A) satisfies inter-vention locality if its change set is restricted to the inter-vened variables and their descendants in G.

CHG( I(A)) ⊆ DE G (A) ∪ A.

Intervention locality is satisfied by the hard interventions considered throughout this paper (and, more generally, by any intervention that only modifies the mechanisms of the intervened variables); as noted below, it is implied by the SCM data-generating process. A critical property of hard interventions is the severance of relationships between the intervened variables and their causes. This breaks down potentially canceling paths, giving rise to the notion of “con-ditional” MICs. Throughout, a conditioning intervention 

I(B) is a hard intervention on a disjoint set B that is held fixed while we probe the effect of a second intervention. 

Definition 3.6 (Conditional MIC) . Let G = ( V, E) be a graph and I(B) be a conditioning intervention on the set 

B ⊂ V. The residual graph GI(B) is the subgraph formed by removing the vertices in B and their incident edges. We say C is a “conditional MIC” of A given I(B) if C is a MIC of A in the residual graph GI(B).

Definition 3.7 (II Faithfulness) . A model is II faithful if for any pair of disjoint intervention sets A and B, all con-ditional MICs of any A ∈ A given I(B) are in the corre-sponding conditional change set CHG( I(A) | I(B)) .Intervention locality and II faithfulness will make up the two main assumptions of our intervention-only causal discovery framework. Like the causal Markov condition, intervention locality is implied by the SCM data-generating process: a hard intervention on A replaces only the structural assign-ments of the variables in A and leaves every other mecha-nism intact, so a variable’s distribution can change only if it is reachable from A along directed paths—that is, only if it lies in A ∪ DE G (A). II faithfulness is similar to CI faithful-ness in that it must be assumed. However, this assumption is significantly weaker, as we will explain by studying it in a parametric setting. 

# 4 PARAMETRIC II FAITHFULNESS 

To analyze the parametric implications of II faithfulness, we return to the setting of linear SEMs where each variable is a linear function of its parents plus an independent noise term εi with E[εi] = 0 and Var (εi) = 1 . We can quantify II faithfulness with a λ-strong version. Definition 4.1 (λ-strong Mean II faithfulness) . A linear SEM is “ λ-strong mean II faithful” if the following holds for every variable A, every conditioning intervention I(B)

with A /∈ B, and every conditional MIC C of A given 

I(B): there exists an intervention on A that shifts its mean by some non-zero amount δ such that the induced change in the mean of C (relative to the distribution under I(B) alone) satisfies |EI({A})|I(B)[C] − EI(B)[C]| ⩾ λ|δ|. In particular, the intervention (and hence δ) may depend on C and B;we do not require a single intervention to work uniformly across all conditioning sets. 

Distributional vs. mean faithfulness. Definition 3.7 (II faithfulness) requires a change in the full distribution of each conditional MIC, whereas Definition 4.1 ( λ-strong mean II faithfulness) constrains the mean . These are not equivalent, and mean II faithfulness is the strictly stronger requirement: an intervention can change a conditional MIC’s distribution while leaving its mean fixed. Our parametric analysis and our algorithmic implementation (Section 6) target mean shifts, and thus certify only mean II faithfulness. Replacing the difference-in-means test with a nonparametric two-sample test (e.g., a Kolmogorov–Smirnov or maximum-mean-discrepancy test) recovers the full distributional no-tion of Definition 3.7 empirically. A similar notion can be defined for the variance, but we stick with means for simplicity, noting that this stronger assumption provides upper bounds on the “strength” of also including variance II faithfulness. λ-strong mean II faithful-ness can be characterized parametrically in this setting. 

Lemma 4.2. In a linear SEM with unit-variance noise, a model is λ-strong mean II faithful if and only if every path coefficient in the model is bounded away from zero, i.e., 

|βij | ⩾ λ for all (i, j ) ∈ E.

This proof is deferred to Appendix A. This lemma reveals that λ-strong mean II faithfulness is parametrically equiva-lent to preventing any single causal link from being trivially weak. In the example from Eq. (1) , this means |α12 | ⩾ λ,

|α23 | ⩾ λ, and |α13 | ⩾ λ.

A local characterization. Lemma 4.2 is inherently local :mean II faithfulness constrains only individual edge coeffi-cients βij , and never sums or products of coefficients along competing paths (as in CI faithfulness). Equivalently, it suf-fices to require that the single coefficient βAC be bounded away from zero for each node A and each conditional MIC 

C of A. Every edge (A, C ) ∈ E is realized as such a pair, by conditioning on one internal vertex of every other A ⇝ C

path. Hence, this local condition coincides with the edge-wise bound |βij | ⩾ λ for all (i, j ) ∈ E.

Lemma 4.3. In a linear SEM with unit-variance noise, the set of parameterizations that violate λ-strong mean II faithfulness is a strict subset of those that violate λ-strong CI faithfulness. 

The intuition behind this proof comes from Lemma 4.2, since trivial coefficients must also result in some trivial correlations (relative to the unit variance). The full proof is deferred to Appendix A. Finally, we can characterize the volume of II faithfulness violations. 

Theorem 4.4. The volume of λ-strong mean II faithfulness violations within the parameter space where all edge coef-ficients βij , (i, j ) ∈ E, lie in [−1, 1] , and for λ ∈ (0 , 1) , is 

O(λ|E|).

This linear growth in λ, when compared to Theorem 2.1, illustrates that II faithfulness is a much milder assumption than CI faithfulness. 

# 5 ALGORITHM 

In Section 3, we laid the foundation for intervention-only causal discovery using change sets and introduced two key assumptions: II faithfulness and intervention locality. We will now present an algorithm that uses this non-parametric framework to learn causal structures, identifying the con-ditions for complete recovery and establishing equivalence classes otherwise. For this entire section, G will denote the true graph with n vertices, and we will assume the model satisfies II faithfulness and intervention locality. The identifiability of causal discovery from interventions depends on the number of variables that can be simultane-ously intervened upon. We refer to this as the cardinality of the intervention, denoted |A| for an intervention I(A). We will first present an algorithm for the unrestricted case and then provide versions for limited intervention cardinality. 

5.1 UNRESTRICTED CARDINALITY 

When the number of simultaneous interventions is not lim-ited, the Unrestricted Intervention Cardinality (UIC) algo-rithm (Algorithm 1) recovers the true graph G = ( V, E).Step 1 performs every single-node intervention and takes the transitive closure of the observed change sets to obtain a supergraph G′ of G; step 2 then walks G′ in topological order and removes each edge Vi → Vj whose endpoint is not a conditional MIC of Vi given the remaining parents. To prove correctness, we first characterize the graph G′

learned in step 1. 

Lemma 5.1. The graph G′ from step 1 is the transitive closure of the true graph G.

The two inclusions are shown separately: TC (Gtemp ) ⊆

TC (G) follows from intervention locality (every edge added to Gtemp marks a true descendant relation), and TC (G) ⊆

TC (Gtemp ) by induction in reverse topological order, using Algorithm 1 Unrestricted Intervention Cardinality (UIC) 

Require: change-set oracle CHG( ·) obtained from hard interventions; vertex set V.

Ensure: estimated causal DAG G′′ . 

> 1:

Gtemp ← (V, ∅) 

> 2:

for each Vi ∈ V do ▷ Step 1: recover the transitive closure  

> 3:

perform I({Vi}) 

> 4:

for each Vj ∈ CHG( I({Vi})) \ { Vi} do  

> 5:

add edge Vi → Vj to Gtemp  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

G′ ← TC (Gtemp ); G′′ ← G ′ 

> 9:

for each Vj in a topological order of G′ do ▷ Step 2: prune spurious edges  

> 10:

for each Vi ∈ PA G′ (Vj ) do  

> 11:

B ← PA G′′ (Vj ) \ { Vi} 

> 12:

if Vj /∈ CHG( I({Vi}) | I(B)) then  

> 13:

remove edge Vi → Vj from G′′  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

return G′′ 

II faithfulness to realize each true edge Vm → Vj as a path through a MIC of Vm. The full proof is given in Appendix A. We now show that step 2 correctly prunes all spurious edges from the transitive closure without removing any true edges. 

Lemma 5.2. An edge Vi → Vj is in the true graph E if and only if Vj ∈ CHG( I({Vi}) | I(PA G′′ (Vj ) \ { Vi})) .

This proof relies on the fact that a superset of the parent set of Vj is easily obtained from the transitive closure that we recovered in the previous step, which can block all paths from Vi to Vj . The full proof is given in Appendix A. 

Theorem 5.3. Assuming II faithfulness and intervention locality, the UIC algorithm learns G using O(n2) interven-tions of cardinality up to n − 1.Proof. Step 1 performs n interventions. Step 2 performs at most one intervention for each edge in the transitive closure 

G′, which is at most O(n2). The cardinality of interventions in step 2 can be up to n − 1. Correctness follows from Lemmas 5.1 and 5.2. 

5.2 RESTRICTED CARDINALITY 

The UIC algorithm may require interventions on n−1 nodes simultaneously, which is often unrealistic. We now consider the case where the cardinality of any intervention is lim-ited, i.e., |A| ⩽ k. The following k-Restricted Intervention Cardinality ( k-RIC) algorithm shows that identifiability is 

Algorithm 2 k-Restricted Intervention Cardinality ( k-RIC) 

Require: change-set oracle CHG( ·); vertex set V; cardi-nality budget k.

Ensure: estimated graph G′′ (equal to G when k > κ max ).  

> 1:

run Step 1 of Algorithm 1 to obtain G′; G′′ ← G ′ 

> 2:

for each Vj in a topological order of G′ do  

> 3:

for each Vi ∈ PA G′ (Vj ) do  

> 4:

G− ← G ′′ with edge Vi → Vj removed  

> 5:

Z ← minimum vertex cut in G− separating Vi

from Vj 

> 6:

if |Z| < k and Vj /∈ CHG( I({Vi}) | I(Z)) 

then  

> 7:

remove edge Vi → Vj from G′′  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

return G′′ 

still possible if k is larger than the maximum local (vertex) connectivity κmax between non-adjacent vertex pairs, i.e., the largest number of vertices needed to block all directed paths between any non-adjacent pair. Throughout, a set Z

“separates” an ordered pair (Vi, V j ) if removing Z (as a hard intervention does to its targets’ incoming edges) leaves no directed path from Vi to Vj . Step 1 is identical to UIC; step 2 (Algorithm 2) differs only in that, before testing an edge 

Vi → Vj , it finds a minimum vertex cut Z separating Vi

from Vj in G′′ and conditions on I(Z), pruning the edge when |Z| < k and Vj /∈ CHG( I({Vi}) | I(Z)) .

Theorem 5.4. Assume II faithfulness and intervention local-ity, and let κmax denote the maximum, over all non-adjacent ordered pairs (Vi, V j ), of the local connectivity of the pair (the minimum number of vertices whose removal destroys all directed paths from Vi to Vj in G). Then the k-RIC algorithm with k > κ max learns G using O(n2) interventions. 

The proof hinges on the topological order traversal, which guarantees that G′′ has the correct structure on the ancestors of vertex Vi when Vj is considered. Hence, we can find a vertex cut separating paths to Vj that matches the minimum vertex cut in the true graph G.The full proof (by case analysis on true edges and non-edges, with the non-edge case an induction in topological order) is given in Appendix A. 

5.3 PARTIAL IDENTIFICATION 

When the intervention cardinality k is less than or equal to the local connectivity required to separate a non-adjacent pair, we lose identifiability. For example, consider two graphs: (1) A → B → C and (2) A → B → C, A → C.With only single-node interventions ( k = 1 ), we observe that B, C ∈ CHG( I({A})) , and C ∈ CHG( I({B})) . This information produces the same transitive closure for both graphs, and we cannot distinguish them without a cardinal-ity 2 intervention ( I({B}) compared to I({A, B })) or a CI test ( A ⊥⊥ C | B). 

Definition 5.5. The k-robust transitive closure of a graph G

is a supergraph of G containing an edge Vi → Vj (for i, j in topological order) if the minimum vertex cut separating Vi

and Vj in G has cardinality k or greater. 

Theorem 5.6. Assuming II faithfulness, the k-RIC algo-rithm recovers G up to its k-robust transitive closure. Proof. The algorithm prunes a spurious edge Vi → Vj if and only if it can find a separating vertex cut Z of size less than k. If the minimum separating set for a non-edge has size ⩾ k, the spurious edge remains. 

# 6 EMPIRICAL VALIDATION 

Setup. We instantiate intervention-based causal discovery with a two-sample Student-t test ( scipy.stats , signif-icance level 0.05 , Bonferroni-corrected for the number of tests) to detect a change in mean, and run the k-RIC algo-rithm for cardinality budgets k ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 10 }.2 On 10 -node graphs, k = 10 is unrestricted and coincides with UIC. We compare against two conditional-independence-reliant base-lines. The first is the PC algorithm [Spirtes et al., 2000] (implementation of Zhang et al., 2021) run on the observa-tional data initially, with the skeleton edges then oriented by the interventions in the usual way (“PC →Interv”). The second is IGSP [Wang et al., 2017], a joint interventional method, given the same single-node interventional datasets that k-RIC uses in its first step; unlike k-RIC, its permuta-tion search still relies on observational CI tests. We evaluate on 30 random DAGs on 10 vertices with 25 expected edges, with additive standard Gaussian noise; the edge-weight range is regime-specific and stated below. To emulate a gene knockout, an intervention severs a node from its parents and resets it to a draw from a Gaussian centered at δ with standard deviation 0.5—a hard (perfect) interven-tion producing a mean shift of δ. Because the exogenous noise has unit variance, δ is expressed in units of the noise standard deviation (e.g., δ = 5 is a five-standard-deviation shift). Keeping a non-negligible intervention variance leaves the intervened variable well-conditioned for the Gaussian CI and invariance tests that IGSP relies on, since a near-deterministic intervention would destabilize the partial cor-relations it estimates. We draw 1000 observational samples and 1000 samples per intervention. All methods receive the same observational sample and the same single-node interventional datasets; k-RIC’s pruning is additionally al-lowed to query targeted interventions on the separating sets 

> 2Code to reproduce all experiments is available on GitHub.

it searches over (adaptive, and used only for k ⩾ 2), which is intrinsic to the method, whereas PC →Interv and IGSP are non-adaptive baselines that consume only the shared pool. We report the structural Hamming distance (SHD) between the true and recovered structures. 

CI refinement. k-RIC returns the k-robust transitive clo-sure, a supergraph of G. We utilize a refinement step that removes the remaining spurious edges with observational CI tests: fixing a topological order of the recovered graph, we test each surviving edge Vi → Vj by conditioning on all other predecessors of Vj in that order, deleting the edge when Vi ⊥⊥ Vj given that set (a partial-correlation test at level α). Conditioning on the full predecessor set blocks ev-ery directed path into Vj , so a true edge’s partial correlation stays proportional to its direct coefficient and is not elim-inated by marginal cancellation; an edge is dropped only when that coefficient is too weak for the observational test to detect—the low-signal regime where interventions hold no advantage either. We apply this step in the coefficient-strength sweep below and the appendix analysis; the violin comparisons report pure k-RIC without this refinement, to isolate the cardinality effect. 

Cardinality (standard regime, weights [−1, 1] ). We first isolate the effect of the intervention cardinality k, the quan-tity our theory turns on. At k = 1 , k-RIC performs no multi-node pruning and carries the spurious ancestral edges of the transitive closure. As the budget grows, multi-node interventions prune these edges and SHD falls—but the size of this effect is governed by δ. When δ = 1 σ the induced shifts are too small for the pruning tests to fire reliably, and all methods sit at comparable SHD; as δ increases, k-RIC improves monotonically with k and drops clearly below both baselines (by k = 2 for δ ⩾ 5σ, and by k = 3 at 

δ = 2 σ), reaching the lowest error of any method at k = 10 

(SHD ≈ 4 at δ = 10 σ; Figure 1). The two baselines are independent of k, and both are overtaken once the inter-ventions carry an appreciable signal. That an intervention-only method, using no CI tests, matches or beats methods that additionally exploit CI is direct evidence of the infor-mational primacy of interventions; the advantage becomes overwhelming under path cancellation, where the CI base-lines collapse (SHD ≈ 15 –19 ) while k-RIC recovers most of the structure (Appendix B, Figure A1). 

Coefficient-strength sweep (weights [−ω, ω ]). Figure 2 compares the three methods across the coefficient range 

[−ω, ω ] and the intervention strength δ, reporting average SHD over 20 DAGs per cell. The intervention-first pipeline— 

k-RIC at k = 2 followed by a CI-refinement step—is best across the great majority of the plane, and its margin widens with the signal: for ω ⩾ 0.5 and δ ⩾ 5 it drives SHD down to roughly 4–6, about half of either baseline. The conditional-independence baselines (PC →Interv and IGSP) PC IGSP k=1 k=2 k=3 k=10          

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> SHD
> k-RIC
> = 1
> PC IGSP k=1 k=2 k=3 k=10
> k-RIC
> = 2
> PC IGSP k=1 k=2 k=3 k=10
> k-RIC
> = 5
> PC IGSP k=1 k=2 k=3 k=10
> k-RIC
> = 10
> Baselines (PC->Interv, IGSP) vs k-RIC across cardinality k=1, 2, 3, 10 (Nodes=10, Edges=25, weights in (-1, 1))

Figure 1: Intervention-only k-RIC across the cardinality budget k ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 10 } versus two CI-reliant baselines, at several intervention strengths δ (weights in [−1, 1] ; 30 DAGs, 10 nodes, 25 edges; SHD, lower is better). PC →Interv (grey) and 

IGSP (orange) are independent of k; the remaining violins are k-RIC at each k (on 10 nodes, k = 10 is unrestricted). As δ

grows, multi-node interventions ( k > 1) prune the spurious ancestral edges that single-node interventions ( k = 1 ) leave behind, and k-RIC drops below both baselines. 1 2 5 10 

> (noise SDs)
> 1.0
> 0.75
> 0.5
> 0.25
> 0.1
> coefficient bound

10.8 8.0 4.3 5.5 

9.4 5.9 4.5 4.5 

8.9 7.7 5.6 4.8 

13.4 9.1 7.2 7.0 

21.9 17.5 14.8 14.3 

k-RIC + CI ( k = 2)    

> 12510
> (noise SDs)
> 1.0
> 0.75
> 0.5
> 0.25
> 0.1

11.3 10.6 10.3 11.2 

11.7 11.2 12.7 11.3 

12.1 11.4 11.6 11.7 

13.4 13.5 13.2 14.4 

19.4 18.8 18.4 18.9 

IGSP    

> 12510
> (noise SDs)
> 1.0
> 0.75
> 0.5
> 0.25
> 0.1

9.9 10.2 9.7 10.1 

8.3 8.7 9.3 8.2 

8.1 8.1 7.8 8.1 

10.1 9.6 8.6 8.7 

17.8 16.7 15.8 15.8 

PC Interv  

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> average SHD (lower is better)
> Average SHD by method (green box = best, or tied within 'se')

Figure 2: Average SHD (lower is better) of three methods across the coefficient bound ω and intervention strength δ (in noise SDs), on 10 -node graphs with 25 edges ( 20 DAGs per cell). Left: the intervention-first pipeline ( k-RIC at k = 2 , then a CI-refinement step). Middle: IGSP. Right: PC →Interv. A green box marks each cell where a method is best, or within one standard error of the best. The intervention-first pipeline is best across most of the plane, ceding only the weakest-signal corner—the smallest δ or ω—to PC →Interv. trail the pipeline across the bulk of the plane and catch up only in the weakest-signal corner—the smallest δ and small-est ω—where the induced mean shift ( ∝ ωδ ) is too small for the interventions to resolve structure and observational CI is all that remains. The two baselines degrade differently as ω

weakens—PC →Interv stays nearly flat (it orients from the interventions) while IGSP falls behind (its search leans on observational CI throughout)—as detailed in Appendix C. 

# 7 DISCUSSION 

Differing geometries of faithfulness assumptions drive dif-ferent robustness to finite-sample noise. We show that causal structure remains recoverable under a much milder no-tion of intervention faithfulness, positioning interventions as primary rather than supporting carriers of causal infor-mation. Empirically, intervention-only k-RIC outperforms the CI-based baselines PC and IGSP, and a secondary CI-refinement step yields a complete pipeline that returns a fully resolved DAG. Since a permutation is the weakest ( 0-robust) intervention equivalence class, generalizing permutation-based methods to k-robust transitive closures is a natural next step toward the intervention-first workflow. 

Limitations. Our framework does not address cancella-tion due to latent confounders, so extending II faithfulness to ancestral graphs (ADMGs/MAGs) is important future work. Our approach also presumes that hard interventions are available. This is natural in domains such as cell biol-ogy (gene knockouts), but interventions are infeasible or ethically impermissible in many settings (e.g., much of en-vironmental and social science), where CI-based methods remain the appropriate tool. Finally, the algorithms as imple-mented test for mean shifts and therefore certify only mean II faithfulness; a nonparametric two-sample test recovers the distributional notion. Soft interventions would require strengthening II faithfulness, since they do not sever a node from its parents and thus do not break canceling paths. Acknowledgements 

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful feed-backs. B.M. is partially supported by the Advanced Re-search Concepts (ARC) COMPASS program, sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under agreement number HR001-25-3-0212. J.Z. was partially supported by the Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center. C.U. was partially supported by NCCIH/NIH (1DP2AT012345), ONR (N00014-24-1-2687), DOE-ASCR (DE-SC0023187), and the Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center at the Broad Institute. 

References 

Philippe Brouillard, Sébastien Lachapelle, Alexan-dre Lacoste, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Alexandre Drouin. Differentiable Causal Discovery from In-terventional Data. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pages 21865–21877. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips. cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/ f8b7aa3a0d349d9562b424160ad18612-Paper. pdf .Hong Chang, Bin Yi, Ruixia Ma, Xiaoguo Zhang, Hongyou Zhao, and Yaguang Xi. CRISPR/cas9, a novel genomic tool to knock down microRNA in vitro and in vivo. Sci-entific reports , 6(1):22312, 2016. Mathieu Chevalley, Patrick Schwab, and Arash Mehrjou. Deriving causal order from single-variable interven-tions: Guarantees & algorithm. In The Thirteenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=u63OVngeSp .Davin Choo, Kirankumar Shiragur, and Arnab Bhat-tacharyya. Verification and search algorithms for causal dags. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 35:12787–12799, 2022. Frederick Eberhardt and Richard Scheines. Interventions and causal inference. Philosophy of science , 74(5):981– 995, 2007. Chunmei Guan, Chao Ye, Xiaomei Yang, and Jiangang Gao. A review of current large-scale mouse knockout efforts. 

genesis , 48(2):73–85, 2010. John L Hartman IV, Barbara Garvik, and Lee Hartwell. Principles for the buffering of genetic variation. Science ,291(5506):1001–1004, 2001. Alain Hauser and Peter Bühlmann. Characterization and greedy learning of interventional markov equivalence classes of directed acyclic graphs. The Journal of Ma-chine Learning Research , 13(1):2409–2464, 2012. Alain Hauser and Peter Bühlmann. Jointly interven-tional and observational data: estimation of interventional markov equivalence classes of directed acyclic graphs. 

Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statisti-cal Methodology , 77(1):291–318, 2015. Yang-Bo He and Zhi Geng. Active Learning of Causal Networks with Intervention Experiments and Optimal Designs. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9 (84):2523–2547, 2008. URL http://jmlr.org/ papers/v9/he08a.html .Amin Jaber, Adele Ribeiro, Jiji Zhang, and Elias Barein-boim. Causal Identification under Markov equivalence: Calculus, Algorithm, and Completeness. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , volume 35, pages 3679–3690. Curran Asso-ciates, Inc., 2022. Dominik Janzing and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal inference using the algorithmic markov condition. IEEE Transac-tions on Information Theory , 56(10):5168–5194, 2010. Murat Kocaoglu. Characterization and learning of causal graphs with small conditioning sets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2023. Murat Kocaoglu, Amin Jaber, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and Elias Bareinboim. Characterization and Learning of Causal Graphs with Latent Variables from Soft Inter-ventions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. Christopher Meek. Strong completeness and faithful-ness in Bayesian networks. In Proceedings of the Eleventh conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelli-gence , UAI’95, pages 411–418, San Francisco, CA, USA, August 1995. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN 978-1-55860-385-1. URL https://dl.acm.org/ doi/10.5555/2074158.2074205 .Marc Franquesa Monés, Jiaqi Zhang, and Caroline Uh-ler. On the number of conditional independence tests in constraint-based causal discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.21844 , 2026. Joris M. Mooij, Sara Magliacane, and Tom Claassen. Joint causal inference from multiple contexts. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(1):99:3919–99:4026, January 2020. ISSN 1532-4435. URL https://dl. acm.org/doi/10.5555/3455716.3455815 .Judea Pearl. Graphs, causality, and structural equation mod-els. Sociological Methods & Research , 27(2):226–284, 1998. Judea Pearl. Causality . Cambridge university press, 2009. Joseph Ramsey, Jiji Zhang, and Peter L Spirtes. Adjacency-faithfulness and conservative causal inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6843 , 2012. Numair Sani, Jaron Lee, and Ilya Shpitser. Identification and Estimation of Causal Effects Defined by Shift Inter-ventions. In Proceedings of the 36th Conference on Un-certainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI) , pages 949–958. PMLR, August 2020. URL https://proceedings. mlr.press/v124/sani20a.html .Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Murat Kocaoglu, Alexandros G Dimakis, and Sriram Vishwanath. Learning causal graphs with small interventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 28, 2015. Shohei Shimizu, Patrik O. Hoyer, Aapo Hyv&#228, ri-nen, and Antti Kerminen. A Linear Non-Gaussian Acyclic Model for Causal Discovery. Journal of Ma-chine Learning Research , 7(72):2003–2030, 2006. ISSN 1533-7928. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v7/ shimizu06a.html .Kirankumar Shiragur, Jiaqi Zhang, and Caroline Uhler. Causal discovery with fewer conditional independence tests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01823 , 2024. Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Cau-sation, prediction, and search . MIT press, 2000. Chandler Squires and Caroline Uhler. Causal structure learning: A combinatorial perspective. Foundations of Computational Mathematics , 23(5):1781–1815, 2023. Chandler Squires, Yuhao Wang, and Caroline Uhler. Permutation-based causal structure learning with un-known intervention targets. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , pages 1039–1048. PMLR, 2020. Caroline Uhler, Garvesh Raskutti, Peter Bühlmann, and Bin Yu. Geometry of the faithfulness assumption in causal inference. The Annals of Statistics , pages 436–463, 2013. Matthew J Vowels, Necati Cihan Camgoz, and Richard Bow-den. D’ya like dags? a survey on structure learning and causal discovery. ACM Computing Surveys , 55(4):1–36, 2022. Yuhao Wang, Liam Solus, Karren Yang, and Caroline Uhler. Permutation-based causal inference algorithms with in-terventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 30, 2017. Sascha Xu, Sarah Mameche, and Jilles Vreeken. Information-theoretic causal discovery in topologi-cal order. In The 28th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , 2025. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=9pjJXQWYXc .Karren Yang, Abigail Katcoff, and Caroline Uhler. Charac-terizing and learning equivalence classes of causal dags under interventions. In International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , pages 5541–5550. PMLR, 2018. Jiji Zhang and Peter L Spirtes. Strong faithfulness and uniform consistency in causal inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.2506 , 2012. Keli Zhang, Shengyu Zhu, Marcus Kalander, Ignavier Ng, Junjian Ye, Zhitang Chen, and Lujia Pan. gcastle: A python toolbox for causal discovery, 2021. Zihan Zhou, Muhammad Qasim Elahi, and Murat Kocaoglu. Characterization and Learning of Causal Graphs from Hard Interventions. In D. Belgrave, C. Zhang, H. Lin, R. Pascanu, P. Koniusz, M. Ghassemi, and N. Chen, edi-tors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 38, pages 77620–77663. Curran Associates, Inc., 2025. Relaxing Faithfulness with Intervention-Only Causal Discovery (Supplementary Material) 

Bijan H. S. Mazaheri 1,2 Jiaqi Zhang 2, 3 Caroline Uhler 2, 3 1Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA 

> 2

Schmidt Center, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 

> 3

Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 

# A DEFERRED PROOFS 

A.1 PROOF OF LEMMA 3.2 

For any vertex V ∈ V, if CH (V )̸ = ∅, then there is always at least one MIC. We assume G is a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). As G is a DAG, there exists a topological ordering of its vertices. Let’s denote the position of a vertex X in such an ordering by ord (X). A key property of a topological ordering is that if there is a directed path from X to Y , then ord (X) < ord (Y ).Let V be a vertex such that its set of children, CH (V ), is non-empty. Consider the set of topological ordering positions for all children of V :

S = {ord (C) | C ∈ CH (V )}

Since CH (V ) is a finite, non-empty set, S is a finite, non-empty set of integers. Therefore, S must contain a minimum element. Let B ∈ CH (V ) be a child of V that achieves this minimum, i.e., ord (B) = min( S). We claim that B is a most immediate child of V .Suppose for the sake of contradiction that B is not a most immediate child. By definition, this means there must exist another directed path from V to B besides the direct edge V → B. Any such path must be of length at least 2 and must pass through another child of V . Let this path be: 

V → C → · · · → B

where C ∈ CH (V ) and C̸ = B.The existence of a directed path from C to B implies that ord (C) < ord (B). However, C is a child of V , so ord (C) ∈ S.We have found an element in S that is strictly smaller than min( S), which is a contradiction. Therefore, our assumption that B is not a most immediate child must be false. It follows that B is a most immediate child, and such a child must always exist if CH (V ) is non-empty. 

A.2 PROOF OF LEMMA 4.2 

In a linear SEM with unit-variance noise, a model is λ-strong mean II faithful if and only if every path coefficient in the model is bounded away from zero, i.e., |βij | ⩾ λ for all (i, j ) ∈ E.

(⇒) Assume the model is λ-strong mean II faithful. Consider an arbitrary edge (A, C ) ∈ E with coefficient βAC . Let PAC 

be the set of all other directed paths from A to C. For each path p ∈ P AC , select one intermediate vertex Vp along that path. Let the set of all such selected vertices be B = {Vp | p ∈ P AC }.Now consider the intervention I(B). In the residual graph GI(B), all alternative directed paths from A to C are removed, leaving only the direct edge. Therefore, C is a conditional MIC of A given I(B). By the definition of λ-strong mean II faithfulness, an intervention on A must produce a detectable change on C. In a linear model, this change is governed by the total effect in the residual graph, which is simply βAC . The faithfulness condition thus requires |βAC | ⩾ λ. Since (A, C )

was an arbitrary edge, this holds for all edges in E.

(⇐) Assume |βij | ⩾ λ for all edges (i, j ) ∈ E. Consider any disjoint intervention sets I(A) and I(B), and let C be a conditional MIC of some A ∈ A given I(B). By definition, this means that in the residual graph GI(B), the only directed path from A to C is the direct edge (A, C ).In a linear model, the change in the mean of C from an intervention on A (that shifts its mean by δ) is determined by the total effect of A on C in the active graph, multiplied by δ. Here, the total effect is simply the path coefficient of the single connecting path, βAC . The change in mean is thus βAC δ. The condition for λ-strong mean II faithfulness requires 

|βAC δ| ⩾ λ|δ|, which simplifies to |βAC | ⩾ λ. By our initial assumption, this condition is met. Since this holds for any valid choice of A, C, B, the model is λ-strong mean II faithful. 

A.3 PROOF OF LEMMA 4.3 

In a linear SEM with unit-variance noise, the set of parameterizations that violate λ-strong mean II faithfulness is a strict subset of those that violate λ-strong CI faithfulness. By Lemma 4.2, a violation of λ-strong mean II faithfulness is equivalent to |βij | < λ for some edge (i, j ) ∈ E. Consider the adjacent pair (Vi, V j ) and condition on S = PA G (Vj ) \ { Vi}. In a linear Gaussian SEM, the population regression coefficient of Vi in the regression of Vj on {Vi}∪ S equals the structural coefficient βij (since Vj = P    

> P∈PA G(Vj)

βP j P +εj

with εj independent of the parents), and the partial correlation between Vi and Vj given S is 

ρ(Vi, V j | S) = βij 

s

Var( Vi | S)Var( Vj | S) .

Because all conditional variances are finite and strictly positive in a non-degenerate model, the factor multiplying βij is bounded and nonzero; hence |ρ(Vi, V j | S)| is proportional to |βij | and is likewise small whenever |βij | is small. Since 

Vi and Vj are adjacent (hence d-connected given S), a sufficiently small |βij | drives this partial correlation below the corresponding λ-strong CI faithfulness threshold, i.e., a λ-strong CI faithfulness violation. Thus every λ-strong mean II faithfulness violation is also a λ-strong CI faithfulness violation. Crucially, the converse fails: a model can violate CI faithfulness through cancellation (e.g., α13 + α12 α23 = 0 in Eq. (1) ) while every edge coefficient remains large, hence satisfying mean II faithfulness. Therefore the set of mean-II-unfaithful models is strictly contained in the set of CI-unfaithful models. 

A.4 PROOF OF THEOREM 4.4 

Proof. Let the parameter space be the hypercube [−1, 1] |E|. By Lemma 4.2, a λ-strong mean II faithfulness violation occurs if and only if |βij | < λ for at least one edge (i, j ) ∈ E. For a single coefficient, the volume of violating parameters is the region where it lies in (−λ, λ ), which has a relative volume of λ. By applying a union bound over all |E| edges, the relative volume of the violation set is at most O(λ|E|).

A.5 PROOF OF LEMMA 5.1 

The graph G′ from step 1 is the transitive closure of the true graph G.

Proof. Let Gtemp be the graph constructed from the single-node interventions before taking the transitive closure. We need to prove that TC (Gtemp ) = TC (G).First, we show TC (Gtemp ) ⊆ TC (G). An edge Vi → Vj is added to Gtemp only if Vj ∈ CHG( I({Vi})) . By intervention locality, this implies Vj is a descendant of Vi in G. Therefore, every edge in Gtemp corresponds to a path in G, which means 

Gtemp ⊆ TC (G). The transitive closure of a subgraph is a subgraph of the original’s transitive closure, so TC (Gtemp ) ⊆

TC (G).Second, we show TC (G) ⊆ TC (Gtemp ). This is equivalent to showing that G ⊆ TC (Gtemp ). We proceed by induction over the source vertices in reverse topological order, showing that for the vertex currently under consideration, each of its outgoing edges Vi → Vj in G is realized as a directed path from Vi to Vj in Gtemp .Let the vertices be ordered V1, . . . , V n according to a reverse topological sort of G.

Base case: For the first vertex V1 (a sink in G), the claim is vacuously true as it has no outgoing edges. 

Inductive step: Assume for all ℓ < m , the claim holds for Vℓ. Now consider Vm. Let Vj be any child of Vm in G. If Vj

is a MIC of Vm, then by II faithfulness, Vj ∈ CHG( I({Vm})) , so the edge Vm → Vj is in Gtemp . If Vj is not a MIC of 

Vm, then there exists another path from Vm to Vj in G, which must pass through another child of Vm. Let this path be 

Vm → U1 → · · · → Vj . Since U1 appears after Vm in the reverse topological sort, our inductive hypothesis applies to it and all subsequent nodes on the path to Vj . This means there is a path U1 ⇝ Vj in Gtemp . This reduces our problem to showing there is a path Vm ⇝ U1 in Gtemp . This is the same problem we started with for Vj . However, we can construct a sequence of children Vj , U 1, U 2, . . . in which each child is required for a non-MIC path from Vm to the preceding child. Since the number of children is finite, this sequence must terminate, and it must terminate at a child that is a MIC of Vm.Let this MIC be M . By II faithfulness, the edge Vm → M is in Gtemp . The path from M to Vj exists in G, and all nodes on it are covered by the inductive hypothesis, so there is a path M ⇝ Vj in Gtemp . Concatenating these, we get a path 

Vm → M ⇝ Vj in Gtemp . Thus, for any edge Vm → Vj in G, there is a path in Gtemp . This means G ⊆ TC (Gtemp ), which proves TC (G) ⊆ TC (Gtemp ).

A.6 PROOF OF LEMMA 5.2 

An edge Vi → Vj is in the true graph E if and only if Vj ∈ CHG( I({Vi}) | I(PA G′′ (Vj ) \ { Vi})) .

(⇒) Assume Vi → Vj is in E. Let B = PA G′′ (Vj ) \ { Vi}. When we intervene on B, all paths into Vj from its parents (other than Vi) are blocked. Because G′ is the transitive closure, PA G′ (Vj ) contains all ancestors of Vj , so intervening on B

blocks all paths from Vi to Vj that do not begin with the edge Vi → Vj . Thus, Vj becomes a conditional MIC of Vi. By II faithfulness, Vj ∈ CHG( I({Vi}) | I(B)) , so the edge is correctly kept. 

(⇐) Assume Vi → Vj is not in E. Let B = PA G′′ (Vj ) \ { Vi}. Since Vi is not a true parent of Vj , the set of true parents 

PA G (Vj ) is a subset of B. Any directed path from Vi to Vj in G must pass through at least one node in PA G (Vj ). By intervening on B, all such paths are blocked. In the residual graph, Vj is not a descendant of Vi. By intervention locality, 

Vj /∈ CHG( I({Vi}) | I(B)) , so the edge is correctly removed. 

A.7 PROOF OF THEOREM 5.4 

Proof. The algorithm’s correctness hinges on Step 2 correctly deciding whether to keep or remove each candidate edge 

Vi → Vj from the transitive closure graph G′. We analyze this for true edges and non-edges separately. 

Case 1: Vi → Vj is a true edge in G. The algorithm considers the edge Vi → Vj and hypothetically removes it to form G−.It then searches for a minimum vertex cut Z in G− that separates Vi from Vj . Two outcomes are possible: 1. No separating set Z with |Z| < k is found. The algorithm correctly keeps the edge. 2. A separating set Z with |Z| < k is found. The algorithm then tests if Vj ∈ CHG( I({Vi}) | I(Z)) . By definition, the set Z blocks all paths from Vi to Vj in G *except for the direct edge* Vi → Vj . In the context of the conditioning intervention I(Z), the only remaining path from Vi to Vj is the true edge itself. This makes Vj a conditional MIC of Vi

given I(Z). By the II faithfulness assumption, Vj must be in the change set. The condition Vj ∈ CHG( . . . ) is met, and the algorithm correctly keeps the edge. In either outcome, a true edge is never removed. 

Case 2: Vi → Vj is not a true edge in G. We need to show that the algorithm will find a separating set Z with |Z| < k 

and subsequently remove the edge. We prove this by induction on the position of Vj in the topological order used by the algorithm. Without loss of generality, relabel the vertices V1, . . . , V n so that this topological order is V1, . . . , V n.

Inductive Hypothesis (IH): Assume that for every vertex Vm with m < j , all incoming edges to Vm in G′′ have been correctly identified; that is, the subgraph of G′′ induced by {V1, . . . , V j−1} is identical to the subgraph of G induced by the same set of vertices. Inductive Step: Consider the vertex Vj and a candidate edge Vi → Vj that is in G′ but not in G (so i < j ). Since Vi → Vj is not a true edge, (Vi, V j ) is a non-adjacent pair, and there exists a minimum vertex cut Ztrue in G that destroys all directed paths from Vi to Vj . By Menger’s theorem, the size of this cut equals the local connectivity of the pair (Vi, V j )—the maximum number of internally vertex-disjoint directed Vi ⇝ Vj paths. This local quantity is at most κmax by definition, and by the theorem’s premise k > κ max , so |Ztrue | ⩽ κmax < k .Now, we must show that Ztrue also separates Vi and Vj in the current state of G′′ (with the edge Vi → Vj hypothetically removed). Assume for contradiction that it does not. This means there must be a path P ′′ from Vi to Vj in G′′ that avoids 

Ztrue . Since Ztrue separates them in G, this path P ′′ must contain at least one spurious edge (an edge in G′′ but not in G). Let 

(U, W ) be the first such edge on path P ′′ .The vertices U and W must both precede Vj in the topological ordering. Therefore, U, W ∈ { V1, . . . , V j−1}. By our Inductive Hypothesis, the subgraph of G′′ induced by these vertices is already identical to that of G. This means the spurious edge (U, W ) cannot exist, a contradiction. Therefore, Ztrue is a valid vertex cut for (Vi, V j ) in the current graph G′′ . The algorithm searches for a *minimum* vertex cut, Zalg , whose size must be less than or equal to the size of our valid cut: |Zalg | ⩽ |Ztrue | < k .The condition |Zalg | < k is met. The algorithm tests if Vj ∈ CHG( I({Vi}) | I(Zalg )) . Since Zalg is a vertex cut separating 

Vi and Vj in the true graph G, by intervention locality, Vj will not be in the change set. The edge Vi → Vj is correctly removed. By induction, this holds for all vertices and all spurious edges are removed. 

# B PATH-CANCELLATION COMPARISON 

Figure A1 repeats the cardinality comparison of Figure 1 in the path-cancellation regime (edge weights in [−0.1, 0.1] ), the stress test for CI-based methods. PC IGSP k=1 k=2 k=3 k=10          

> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> SHD
> k-RIC
> = 1
> PC IGSP k=1 k=2 k=3 k=10
> k-RIC
> = 2
> PC IGSP k=1 k=2 k=3 k=10
> k-RIC
> = 5
> PC IGSP k=1 k=2 k=3 k=10
> k-RIC
> = 10
> Baselines (PC->Interv, IGSP) vs k-RIC across cardinality k=1, 2, 3, 10 (Nodes=10, Edges=25, weights in (-0.1, 0.1))

Figure A1: The cardinality comparison under significant risk of path cancellation (weights in [−0.1, 0.1] ; 30 DAGs, 10 

nodes, 25 edges). The small, sign-varied coefficients make partial correlations cancel, leaving PC →Interv and IGSP near-uninformative at every δ, whereas intervention-only k-RIC, which uses no independence tests, recovers most of the structure once the intervention strength is sufficient ( δ ≳ 5σ). Small, sign-varied coefficients make partial correlations cancel, so the conditional-independence baselines PC →Interv and IGSP stay near-uninformative (SHD ≈ 15 –19 ) at every δ. k-RIC never tests independencies and is immune to this cancellation; it is limited only by whether the (now small) intervention shifts are detectable. Once δ ≳ 2σ makes them visible, even the crudest intervention-only estimate already beats both baselines, and by δ = 5 σ k -RIC recovers most of the structure (SHD ≈ 6, roughly a third of the baselines’ error), reaching SHD ≈ 4–5 at δ = 10 σ. Here the cardinality budget k barely matters—the tiny coefficients leave the multi-node pruning tests underpowered, so extra cardinality buys little—which is exactly why we isolate the cardinality effect in the more benign standard regime of Figure 1, where the signal is strong enough for pruning to bite. The δ-dependence of the k-RIC violins in Figure A1 reflects the power of the underlying two-sample tests. When δ is small relative to the noise, the tests are underpowered: they miss true MIC shifts (causing missed edges) and fail to certify redundant edges as prunable (causing under-pruning), which both raise and widen the SHD distribution and account for the residual error even at large k. As δ grows, both failure modes recede and the distributions concentrate at low SHD. This is precisely the λ-strong mean II-faithfulness regime of Section 4: the detectable mean shift at a MIC scales with the product of the intervention strength δ and the edge coefficient, so shrinking δ shrinks the effective λ that is satisfied (Figure 2). 

# C COEFFICIENT-STRENGTH DEPENDENCE OF THE BASELINES 

Figure 2 reports mean SHD across the (ω, δ ) plane; Figure A2 isolates the coefficient-strength dependence by fixing δ = 5 σ

and plotting SHD against ω for the three methods. PC →Interv is nearly flat in ω: it recovers the skeleton from observational conditional independence but orients every edge directly from the interventional shifts, which stay strong at δ = 5 σ

regardless of ω. IGSP, whose permutation search relies on observational CI tests throughout, degrades steadily as ω shrinks and those tests lose power. The intervention-first pipeline is lowest across the range. This is the same mechanism, now at the level of whole algorithms, that motivates preferring interventions to conditional independence: the more a method’s decisions rest on CI tests, the more it suffers as the parametric signal weakens. 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

coefficient bound 

> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> average SHD (lower is better)

## SHD vs at = 5 (10 nodes, 25 edges, 20 DAGs)   

> k-RIC + CI ( k= 2)
> PC Interv
> IGSP

Figure A2: Average SHD versus the coefficient bound ω at fixed intervention strength δ = 5 σ (10 -node graphs, 25 edges; shaded bands are ±1 standard error). PC →Interv stays roughly flat because it orients edges from the interventions; IGSP degrades as ω weakens because its permutation search depends on observational CI tests; the intervention-first pipeline (k-RIC + CI, k = 2 ) is lowest throughout.