Fisher et al
Preprint
PAPER
Multivariate conformal uncertainty propagation in multitask
atomistic simulation: Successes and pitfalls
Katharine Fisher1,∗
, Michael Herbst2,3
, James Kermode4
and Youssef Marzouk1
1Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
2Mathematics for Materials Modelling, Institute of Mathematics & Institute of Materials, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale
de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
3National Centre for Computational Design and Discovery of Novel Materials (MARVEL), ´Ecole Polytechnique
F´ed´erale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
4Warwick Centre for Predictive Modelling, School of Engineering, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United
Kingdom
∗Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: kefisher@mit.edu
Keywords: atomistic modeling, Bayesian inference, multivariate conformal prediction, conformal risk control, corre-
lated prediction sets, uncertainty propagation
Abstract
Machine learning has become the standard tool for the design of interatomic potentials
which balance efficiency and accuracy, but uncertainty quantification remains an open
problem. Multiscale simulations introduce an additional challenge: robust uncertainty
quantification across scales. Even within one scale, computations are often multistage,
producing a sequence of target quantities, each dependent on the previous, and each with
some uncertainty. Conformal methods have emerged as a model agnostic framework for
recalibrating surrogate predictions to produce sets which contain the truth at a
user-specified rate. For multistage workflows, we require uncertainty calibration for
multiple chemical properties and atomistic configurations, and we want to propagate
uncertainty sets to downstream quantities of interest. Such propagation should capture
the error cancellations which occur in many downstream targets in materials science; for
instance, an approximate energy difference is often more accurate than individual energy
predictions. We present the first exploration of multivariate conformal methods for
chemical properties, including Bonferroni-corrected hyperrectangles, hyperellipsoidal sets
based on the Mahalanobis distance, and custom loss functions within conformal risk
control. Calibration is applied directly to predicted energies, atomic forces, and virial
stresses, then propagated to elastic constants and vacancy formation energies employing a
variety of commonly considered approximate protocols in materials modeling. We
highlight the benefits of building correlation predictions into the conformal procedure,
making it possible to build sets which capture near symmetries and error cancellation. We
conclude with a discussion of the interplay of the employed approximate computational
protocol and conformal guarantees.
1
Introduction
First principles methods can accurately simulate materials, but their computational cost quickly
becomes astronomical as system size increases. In recent decades, machine learning surrogates have
become standard in atomistic simulation because of their comparative computational efficiency [1,
2, 3]. As a result, modern surrogate workflows can capture multiscale processes, incorporating un-
precedented time and length scales. Being able to push traditional boundaries raises novel challenges:
gauging the accuracy of surrogate predictions.
Both deep learning [3] and kernel based [4, 5, 6, 7] surrogates have seen remarkable success in ma-
terials simulations, but the two approaches pose different challenges for uncertainty quantification.
The process by which deep learning architectures encode information from data remains mysteri-
ous [8], and the interpretation of uncertainty estimates for model parameters is not obvious [9]. In
contrast, kernel methods, such as Gaussian process regression, offer principled predictions, but in
1
arXiv:2609.31384v1  [physics.chem-ph]  25 Sep 2026


Fisher et al
realistic settings, data generally does not comply with the probabilistic assumptions of these surro-
gates, leading to overconfident and misleading estimates. There is a need for reliable uncertainty
quantification strategies which extract useful information from available data and can be easily and
efficiently incorporated into multistage materials workflows.
PREDICT
CALIBRATE
PROPAGATE
Y
L1
Y
Y
Y
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q2
Q2
Q2
Q2
more information
multivariate
Q1
L1
L1
L1
multi-prop
Bonferroni
univariate
L2
L2
L2
L2
Figure 1.
Workflows to calibrate and propagate uncertainty in surrogate predictions: We illustrate
several conformal methods which leverage different degrees of information to construct multivariate uncertainty sets
for a target Y . These uncertainty sets may then be propagated to downstream quantities of interest Q1 and Q2 via
linear operators L1 and L2, respectively. Where applicable, prediction sets are labeled with an abbreviation of the
corresponding conformal guarantee. Let pi be the probability that an individual component of the true quantity is
contained in the corresponding prediction set and P be the probability that the entire truth vector is contained in
the multivariate set. The lower bound v ≤. . . indicates that a coverage (also called a validity) constraint holds; the
upper bound · · · ≤s indicates a sharpness constraint, which guarantees that predictive sets will not be overly
conservative. When using more information (e.g., a covariance Σ or knowledge of the operator L), tighter bounds
can be derived for the propagated sets. The stars accompanying sets on Q1 indicate correspondence with Figure 2.
Figure 2.
Finding near symmetries: multivariate conformal prediction can leverage the correlation between
properties. As an example, the multivariate approach (purple) discovers the near symmetry of the C12 elastic
constant components for two perturbed silicon configurations. In contrast, univariate conformal methods (gold and
orange) produce uncorrelated sets which either undercover or include excessive volume. The conformal sets are
calibrated on energy predictions for perturbed and relaxed supercells of Si16 diamond crystals with tolerance
α = 0.25 and uncertainty sets are projected into elastic constant space. The stars in the upper left corner show
correspondence with Figure 1.
Conformal methods can use surrogate outputs to construct prediction sets with finite sample
calibration guarantees [10, 11, 12]. The procedure can be applied post hoc to any model and essen-
tially learns that model’s prediction and uncertainty quantification capabilities. Initial explorations
of these methods for atomistic simulation have demonstrated their broad compatibility and their
ability to utilize model specific outputs, such as standard deviations from Gaussian process predic-
tive distributions [13, 14, 15, 16]. One limitation of existing work is the focus on scalar quantities
2


1.1
Contributions
Fisher et al
of interest, such as global energy for a single system.
Often, a multiscale workflow will require
uncertainty estimates for multivariate quantities of interest, such as virial stresses. Furthermore,
within multistage simulations, we will be interested in the propagation of uncertainty from multiple
systems into downstream and derived quantities. For example, we may leverage the global energy
of each member of an ensemble of perturbed systems to predict downstream properties such as the
elastic constant tensor. Several strategies have recently been proposed to build prediction sets with
multivariate guarantees, typically tested on toy data and benchmarking problems [17, 18]. To our
knowledge, this paper is the first to extend these methods to material properties prediction.
In this work, we test computationally efficient methods for obtaining multivariate prediction
sets on chemical properties. We consider both standard conformal prediction and its generaliza-
tion to arbitrary, set-valued loss functions, conformal risk control [19].
Specifically, we use the
correlation between chemical properties, estimated by the Gaussian process predicted covariance, to
construct hyperelliptical sets [20, 21]. Further, we consider the propagation of these uncertainty sets
to downstream quantities of interest. We compare several multistage simulation workflows, shown
schematically in Figure 1. The choice of conformal method determines set shape and the proba-
bilistic guarantee that the set contains the true property. In particular, we explore the behavior of
hyperelliptical sets which automatically provide coverage guarantees for downstream quantities of
interest. The consequences are apparent in Figure 2. Here, conformal calibration was applied to the
energy of several geometrically similar Silicon crystals, then propagated to produce two-dimensional
sets predicting the same elastic constant component for two different systems1. Not only do the mul-
tivariate sets show superior coverage of the true values, but they reflect the near symmetry in related
quantities, often producing nearly diagonal sets. We achieve this result by training the conformal
procedure to recognize the correlation between related quantities. This adaptation is crucial to cap-
turing the error cancellations which occur in the computation of many key quantities in materials
science, such as trends and differences in properties. By capturing these relationships, elliptical sets
often produce sets at smaller volume than competing methods, at a given coverage level. Thus, these
sets are simultaneously robust and less conservative than alternatives because they are less likely to
incorporate unlikely predictions.
We enumerate our contributions in the following subsection, and Section 2 puts them in the
context of existing literature. In Section 3, we provide an overview of the methods combined in our
work. Our numerical experiments are detailed in Section 4, and we conclude in Sections 5 and 6
with a discussion of the strengths and potential pitfalls of our approach.
1.1
Contributions
• We identify algorithms for conformal prediction and risk control which efficiently construct
multivariate prediction sets. By combining these algorithms with interatomic potentials, we
create calibrated prediction workflows.
• Our workflow melds Bayesian and frequentist procedures. The covariance provided by Gaussian
process regression is incorporated into the conformal scores so that predictive sets capture the
relationships between quantities of interest, achieving sets with frequentist validity which are
not overly conservative.
• We combine multiple information sources using a multitask Gaussian process interatomic po-
tential which relates the energies, forces, and stresses for bulk and vacancy atomistic systems.
• The test cases considered include conformal sets with O(100) dimensions, one to two orders of
magnitude larger than typically considered in conformal literature, with few exceptions [22].
• Two new loss functions for conformal risk control are formulated to promote high component-
wise coverage rates for multivariate quantities of interest by leveraging covariance predictions.
These strategies can avoid producing the overly conservative sets which can arise when multi-
variate conformal methods are applied to sufficiently high dimensional targets.
• We examine nontrivial examples of propagation of multivariate uncertainty sets. Specifically,
we consider the prediction of elastic constants and vacancy formation energies, i.e. quantities
which involve multiple energy and force evaluations as part of a prediction workflow involving
structural perturbations and relaxations.
• We discuss potential pitfalls which may arise when propagating conformal sets through ap-
proximate transformations.
1More detail on this experiment will be provided in Section 4.4
3


Fisher et al
2
Related work
2.1
Machine learning interatomic potentials
Due to the computational expense of simulation from first principles [23], machine learning has
become standard in the design of potential energy surfaces and force fields. In recent years, a favorable
balance of accuracy and efficiency has been achieved with data intensive, deep neural network based
frameworks [3]. Graph based architectures capture the structure of atomistic systems [24, 25] and
encode equivariant transformations [26, 27]. Foundation models [28] and chemistry focused large
language models [29] demonstrate the promise of large-scale learning for general purpose prediction.
While deep learning achieves state of the art performance, reliable UQ for these methods remains
an open problem, as discussed in Subsection 2.2.
Kernel methods form another class of machine learning surrogates where the similarity between
atomistic systems is explicitly modeled. The Bayesian framework was used to build Gaussian ap-
proximation potentials [4, 5, 6, 7], providing interpretable, probabilistic uncertainty quantification.
In certain regimes, the accuracy of kernel methods can rival deep neural networks [30, 31, 32], and a
suite of strategies have been developed for scaling these approaches to large datasets [33, 34, 35]. In
this work, we focus on kernel methods for their ease of implementation and principled UQ, but all
of our experiments are straightforward to port to the neural network setting. Similarly, surrogates
which learn from multiple information sources can be designed as neural networks or kernel models,
but in the latter case similarity can be explicitly modeled. Examples include multitask inference [36,
37], multifidelity information fusion [38, 39, 40, 41, 42], and optimized combinations of submod-
els [43, 44, 45, 46]. A variant of learning from multiple data sources is ∆-learning [47, 48, 49, 38],
which directly models the difference between two datasets. This procedure can also be extended
to the multitask setting [36]. Such multitask methods inherit the UQ challenges of the underlying
choice of surrogate model.
2.2
UQ in atomistic simulation
A wide range of uncertainty quantification strategies devised for machine learning have been tested
in the materials science setting [50, 51, 52]. A few UQ methods have been developed in response
to specific challenges in atomistic simulation, i.e. misspecified, deterministic models [53]. In this
work, we focus primarily on uncertainty predicted by Gaussian process models [4, 5, 6, 7] and cali-
brated through conformal procedures [13, 14, 15, 16]. We note that both approaches offer principled
theoretical guarantees, provided modeling assumptions are met, which offer interpretability. Such
guarantees are challenging to access for UQ methods tailored to neural network architectures [54,
55], even in ostensibly Bayesian settings [9]. Sampling the high-dimensional, multimodal posteriors
of Bayesian neural networks is generally intractable. Deep ensemble members can be interpreted
as posterior samples [56] and show strong empirical performance but are computationally expen-
sive [57, 58]. Last layer ensembles [59, 58] offer an efficient solution for atomistic simulations [60, 61,
62] and can be interpreted as a model of a single posterior mode (Laplace approximation). None of
these methods guarantee calibrated UQ, and unimodal approximations are particularly vulnerable
to overconfidence [63, 64, 9].
Existing approaches to propagation of atomistic scale uncertainty generally involve pushing sam-
ples {y(i)}n
i=1 through a forward model {f(y(i))}n
i=1. If samples are difficult to obtain or f is nonlin-
ear, this approach to propagation can incur a high computational cost. We can mitigate this expense
by linearizing f, i.e. via a Taylor expansion [60, 61, 62]. Furthermore, if the samples {y(i)}n
i=1 are
distributed according to a Gaussian density, that distribution can be pushed through a linear model,
eliminating the need for sampling [65]. Thus, the output of Gaussian process regression models are
particularly amenable to propagation, provided that we can ensure that predicted distributions are
trustworthy. For this purpose, we turn to conformal methods.
2.3
Multivariate conformal methods
Within the past few years, a wealth of new strategies have been proposed for conformalizing multi-
variate targets [17, 18]. One class of methods applies univariate algorithms to each dimension; the
intersection of their predictive intervals forms a predictive hypperrectangle [66]. Tools from classical
statistics, such as the Bonferroni correction [67] or multiple hypothesis testing [68, 69], can be used to
adjust the probability that the hypperrectangle covers the true value. We use such hyperrectangular
sets as a baselines in our work.
Conformal algorithms rely on a score function which rates the accuracy of surrogate predictions.
Several methods function by transforming a multivariate prediction into a univariate score which
is compatible with the original conformal algorithm [70, 17].
The score may be, for example, a
probability density [71, 72, 73, 70, 74, 70, 17]. Closely related is the Mahalanobis distance score, a
4


2.4
Conformal uncertainty propagation
Fisher et al
transformation of the Gaussian density [20, 21, 22, 75]. We adopt this score because it is straight-
forward to implement and fast at prediction time. The resulting hyperelliptical sets are conducive
to uncertainty propagation and capture correlation. Other explorations of hyperelliptical conformal
sets learn correlation from the sample covariance [20, 22, 75] or a parameterized model [21], but
we use the covariance predicted by Bayesian regression.
This workflow bears some similarity to
methods which build scores from the Bayesian covariance, computed using a kernel which relates
prediction residuals [76]. However, the latter approach does not necessarily produce convex sets
which are amenable to uncertainty propagation. The same shortcoming holds for generalizations of
the Mahalanobis score to an ℓp distance where p and distribution statistics are learned hyperparame-
ters [77]. Further approaches also present computational challenges: leveraging optimal transport to
generalize the notion of a quantile to multiple dimensions [78, 79, 80], modeling correlation structure
using copulas [81, 82, 83], performing quantile regression [84], and optimizing transformations of
hypercubes [85, 86].
2.4
Conformal uncertainty propagation
We focus on hyperrectangular and hyperellipsoidal sets because both are amenable to transforma-
tion. Prior exploration of conformal uncertainty propagation has been limited. The closest work [21]
to our own considers the propagation of ellipsoidal uncertainty sets and notes the coverage properties
of downstream sets. However, the results presented consist of only toy examples or randomly sam-
pled propagation operators applied to sets of at most 16 dimensions, whereas we consider a practical
workflow for atomistic modeling and higher dimensional calibration spaces. A few works have prop-
agated univariate conformal sets for specific applications: for instance, pushing uncertainty in crop
yield forward to a prediction interval for profit [87] or adjusting the standard deviations propagated
by a Kalman filter in multiple object tracking [88]. Beyond these works, the most relevant field to
conformal uncertainty propagation appears to be conformal decision making [89], where uncertainty
sets inform an action. Within this category are, to the authors’ knowledge, the only previous applica-
tions of multivariate conformal prediction [90] and of conformal risk control [91] to materials science
workflows. These applications differ from ours in that their goal is to design a diverse set of atomistic
systems with low manufacturing cost, rather than to build prediction sets for chemical properties.
Other works in decision making consider the settings of multiple object detection where a conformal
set on labels is the basis for class conditional conformal regression on a bounding box [68], trajectory
optimization where the coverage constraints are reallocated across time as the state evolves [92],
hierarchical medical diagnosis based on a downstream loss function [93], and a financial model where
the first stage of conformal prediction can lead to early stopping of the automated procedure and
escalation to a human reviewer [94].
3
Methods
3.1
Gaussian approximation potential (GAP)
For each of n systems, consider a 4-tuple of properties: {(R(i), E(i), F (i), ς(i))}n
i=1. R(i) ∈RM (i)×3
holds the Cartesian coordinates in 3-dimensional space for the M (i) atoms which compose the ith
system. E(i) ∈R, F (i) ∈RM (i)×3, and ς(i) ∈R3×3 are, respectively, the global energy, atomic forces,
and virial stresses of the system. Note also that for our experiments, we focus on periodic systems,
which also require a 3 × 3 cell matrix, conjugate to the stress. The quantities are related via
F (i)
=
−∇R(i)E(i) ,
(1)
r(i)
abc
=
R(i)
ac −R(i)
bc ,
(2)
ς(i)
αβ
=
1
V (i)
M (i)
X
a=1
M (i)
X
b>a
r(i)
abα
∂E(i)
∂r(i)
abβ
∂r(i)
abβ
∂R(i)
aβ
=
1
V (i)
∂E(i)
∂ϵαβ
,
(3)
where V (i) and ϵ are respectively the volume and the strain tensor of the configuration cell.
The first component of our prediction pipeline is a surrogate model which maps representations
of atomistic geometry to some subset of (E(i), F (i), ς(i)). These predictions will then be calibrated
with conformal methods which, conveniently, are agnostic to the form of the surrogate f. We choose
to use Gaussian approximation potentials (GAP) which are established in chemical modeling [4, 5,
6, 7], straightforward to implement, and interpretable. In particular, we will leverage covariance
predictions which are grounded in probability theory, in contrast to the comparatively ad hoc UQ
methods available for neural networks [63, 57, 64] as discussed in Subsection 2.2.
To build a GAP model, we require features X which capture the similarity between configurations.
Using the Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP) [95, 5, 96], we construct X(i) ∈RdX×M (i)
5


3.2
Multitask Gaussian process models
Fisher et al
where each column X(i) represents atom a and its interaction with neighboring atoms. Implicitly, our
surrogate model will assume that the global energy is additively decomposed into local contributions
E(i)
=
f(X(i)) + η(i) =
M (i)
X
a=1
ε(X(i)
a ) + η(i) ,
(4)
X(i)
a
=
ξ(R(i)
a ; ℓmax, nmax, rcut) ,
(5)
where ξ is the SOAP map which introduces hyperparameters ℓmax, nmax, and rcut. η(i) is a centered,
Gaussian noise term, realized independently for different atomistic systems, with variance γ. Given
a kernel function k : RdX × RdX →R, we define a Gaussian process prior
f(X∗) ∼N

0,
M ∗
X
a=1
M ′
X
b=1
k(X∗
a, X′
b)

.
(6)
We pair SOAP descriptors with a polynomial kernel because the inner product effectively computes
an integral over all rotations of the descriptor power spectrum, producing a rotationally invariant
covariance. Note that this prior model only describes system energy. We also want the ability to
learn from and predict forces and stresses. Following Equations (1)-(3), we derive the covariances
between each pair of properties by differentiating through k and ξ [5].
Once a training set t and testing set ∗of atomistic systems and properties have been identified,
let Yt be the column vector of all training data and K represent the covariance given by k for the
sets indicated in the subscript. Gaussian process regression [97] provides the predictive distribution
for f conditioned on Yt. The predictive mean and covariance are
µ
=
K∗t(Ktt + γI)−1Yt ,
(7)
Σ
=
K∗∗−K∗t(Ktt + γI)−1Kt∗.
(8)
These expressions require the inversion of a potentially large matrix, but the computational cost can
be greatly ameliorated using methods from the well developed field of scalable Gaussian processes [33,
34, 35]. The final covariance Σ is the initial test covariance K∗∗minus the squared Mahalanobis
distance between the training and testing data. Assuming that the multivariate Gaussian model for
f is justified, this adjustment is a principled update to our knowledge about the testing set.
3.2
Multitask Gaussian process models
There is a clear physical relationship between energy, force, and stress which guides the incorporation
of these heterogeneous data types into one model. However, we may also have access to heterogeneous
data where the mathematical relationship between different sets is not precisely known. For instance,
for a single geometry R(i), we may have experimental observations of energy E(i, exp) along with
predictions at multiple levels of quantum chemical theory [36], i.e. E(i, DFT) and E(i, CCSD). In our
numerical experiments, we will consider an example where we learn from the energy of bulk and the
vacancy configurations. Na¨ıvely, each heterogeneous dataset can be used to build an independent
model.
We will instead consider a multitask Gaussian process approach [98, 99, 100, 36] which
models correlations in all training data and can predict correlations in heterogeneous testing sets.
Each heterogeneous set of data will be labeled a task. We will identify one task as the primary
task p, and the remaining tasks will be secondary tasks s1, . . . , sJ. Following Equation (4), we model
the energy predictions of the tasks as
E(i, p)
=
f (p)(X(i, p)) + η(i, p) ,
(9)
E(i, sj)
=
f (sj)(X(i, sj)) + η(i, sj) ,
j = 1, . . . , J .
(10)
To allow for joint learning, we must choose an ansatz to capture the relationship between tasks. A
straightforward and effective [36] approach models the linear correlation between tasks:
E(i, sj)(X(i, sj)) = ϱ(sj)E(i, p)(X(i, p)) + δ(sj)(X(i, sj)) .
(11)
Above, we have introduced the task specific correlation hyperparameter ϱ(sj) and residual δ(sj)(X(i, sj)).
The latter prevents “negative transfer” by modeling behavior of task sj which is not linearly corre-
lated to the primary task. In contrast to multifidelity fusion models [98], all secondary tasks have
an equivalent relationship to the primary task, so no hierarchy is encoded in s1, . . . , sJ.
6


3.3
Conformal prediction
Fisher et al
To train our model, we assume Gaussian process priors for the residuals δ(sj)(X(i, sj)) for j =
1, . . . J. Using Equations Equations (1)-(3) and (11), we can find the covariance between any pair of
data points from the union of our training and test set. Crucially, we do not require full knowledge
of our training examples. More concretely, if we only have data from example (i) for one task, we
can still incorporate that data into our model. Similarly, we do not need to have the complete set
(E(i), F (i), ς(i)) for each (i) to learn from a subset of these properties.
3.3
Conformal prediction
Gaussian process regression produces a predictive distribution with uncertainty encoded in the pos-
terior covariance: Σ. Conditioning on new data points leads to coherent updates of this uncertainty
representation provided that priors, kernel models, and noise assumptions are well specified.
In
practical chemistry models, some level of misspecification is nearly certain, i.e. due to interaction
truncations, descriptor approximations, etc. The exact degree of misspecification is challenging to
identify. Conformal methods offer a post-hoc procedure that learns to correct to raw predictions and
uncertainty estimates of a surrogate model [10, 11, 12].
Suppose we have a calibration dataset {(X(n+i), Y (n+i)}m
i=1 of m data points which have been
set aside during training of the surrogate model. For the moment, Y (i) may take on the value of
system energy or an element of the force or stress matrices. Given a new test point (X(test), Y (test)),
conformal prediction constructs a set Γm(X(test)) with the finite sample guarantee
1 −α ≤P

Y (test) ∈Γm(X(test))

≤1 −α +
1
1 + m ,
(12)
provided that the calibration and testing data are exchangeable (a relaxation of independent and
identically distributed).
The bounded quantity is the coverage of the prediction set of the true
property. We refer to the lower bound as a coverage or validity guarantee, controlled by the user’s
chosen tolerance α. The upper bound is a sharpness guarantee which indicates that valid sets will
not be overly conservative.
Split, or inductive, conformal prediction is a computationally efficient strategy for building
Γm(X(test)).
We define a score function s(X, Y ) which evaluates the ability of the surrogate to
predict Y given X. Larger scores indicate worse predictive performance. Optionally, the score may
give surrogates credit for estimating high uncertainty for poor predictions. For instance, a common
score applied to regression problems is
suni(X, Y ) = |µ(X) −Y |
σ(X)
,
(13)
where µ(X) and σ(X) are the surrogate’s mean and standard deviation predictions, respectively.
s(X, Y ) is used to score each calibration data pair, and we let ˆq be the ⌈m−1(m+1)(α−1)⌉quantile
of the resulting scores. Then,
Γm(X(test)) =
n
Y : s(X(test), Y ) ≤ˆq
o
,
(14)
achieves the conformal guarantees (12).
Choosing the score (13) leads to a prediction interval:
Y ∈[µ(X) −ˆqσ(X), µ(X) + ˆqσ(X)]. Note that for any X, this approach produces a ˆq scaling of the
original one standard deviation interval about the mean. Without further assumptions, conformal
methods cannot guarantee coverage conditional on X [12]. Rather, scores may be chosen which
empirically provide good conditional coverage, procedural modifications may be made to achieve
class conditional coverage, or additional assumptions may be imposed.
3.4
Multivariate conformal prediction
Conformal prediction was originally formulated for scalar predictions Y . In our materials science
setting, however, we are interested in the atomic forces and virial stresses of a configuration, in
addition to global energy. Applying the univariate approach to each component of a multivariate
Y ∈RdY results in the conformal guarantee (12) applying independently to each coordinate. The
coverage probability for the entire vector is bounded below by approximately 1−d−1
Y α. Based on this
observation, a Bonferroni-style correction divides the original choice of α by dY [67]. As reviewed
in Section 2, diverse additional strategies have been proposed for extending conformal methods to
multivariate settings [17, 18].
Some quantities of interest, such as atomic forces, scale with the number of atoms in a given
system, and we are often interested in the correlation of properties across systems. Consequently,
7


3.5
Conformal risk control
Fisher et al
we consider higher dimensional vectors than are typically seen in literature. Save one exception [22]
previously reported examples only considered applications between 2 and 16 dimensions. To handle
the high dimensional properties in this work, we require a computationally efficient approach. The
Mahalanobis distance score [20, 21]
smulti(X, Y ) = d−1/2
Y
∥Σ(X)−1/2(Y −µ(X))∥2 ,
(15)
can be incorporated seamlessly into the existing conformal workflow because it maps multivariate
predictions to scalar scores.
Furthermore, this approach allows us to build calibration and test
sets where the size of Y is nonuniform, as occurs if we consider systems with different numbers of
atoms. For univariate Y , the Mahalanobis distance reduces to suni(X, Y ). Unlike the univariate
approach, smulti uses the full covariance prediction Σ.
Thus, when our Gaussian process model
identifies correlated predictions, multivariate conformal calibration can leverage the relationship to
produce smaller sets. Specifically, for a test point, the predictive set
smulti(X(test), Y ) ≤ˆq2 ,
is a (hyper)ellipsoid. As discussed further in Subsection 3.6, this shape facilitates sample-free uncer-
tainty propagation through a multi-step workflow.
3.5
Conformal risk control
The choice between univariate and full vector coverage may seem restrictive, particularly as the
dimension of Y grows.
One response may be to compensate by adjusting α.
This strategy has
limitations: in the univariate setting, all correlations are discarded, risking unnecessarily large sets;
in the multivariate setting in the multivariate setting, a Y ∈R1000, which is not covered could imply
everything between two extremes: namely that (1) all components of Y are outside the component-
wise intervals induced by Γm(X(test)) or that (2) 999 components of Y ∈R1000 are contained in a
projection of Γm(X(test)) (onto the corresponding 999 dimensional space), but only the remaining
1000th component is not.
More bespoke guarantees are possible through conformal risk control [19]. A set Γm, λ(X(test)) is
constructed so that
α −
2B
m + 1 ≤E
h
ℓ

Γm, bλ(X(test)), Y (test)i
≤α ,
(16)
where ℓ

Γm, bλ(·), ·

is some loss function which is non-increasing in bλ and bounded above by B.
Choosing ℓto be 1
n
Y (test) ∈Γm, bλ(X(test))
o
recovers traditional conformal prediction. As previous
work [19] describes in detail, bλ is determined from the average loss of the calibration set, analogously
to ˆq in conformal prediction.
For ease of implementation and propagation, we focus on (hyper)ellipsoidal sets
∥∆∥2 = d−1/2
Y
∥Σ(X)−1/2(Y −µ(X))∥2 ≤λ ,
(17)
where for convenience, we introduce ∆= (dY λΣ(X))−1/2(Y −µ(X)). A natural choice of loss may
be
ℓ2
λ(X, Y ) = min {B, ∥∆∥2 −λ} ,
(18)
which applies a linear penalty to violation of (17) and a linear reward when the left hand side of (17)
is smaller than λ, subject to truncation by hyperparameter B. In our experience, this approach
produces similar behavior to the loss induced by using smulti in conformal prediction. Instead, we
introduce two loss functions applied to ∆:
ℓ1
λ(X, Y )
=
∥∆∥1 ,
(19)
ℓq
λ, β(X, Y )
=
quantileβ (∆) .
(20)
The above losses promotes sparsity in ∆, compared to results obtained by using a loss based on
∥∆∥2. We aim to construct ellipsoidal sets with high, but not complete, component-wise coverage.
8


3.6
Conformal uncertainty propagation
Fisher et al
3.6
Conformal uncertainty propagation
We are interested in propagating our prediction sets to downstream quantities of interest Q ∈RdQ
where dQ ≤dY .
This task is relevant to multistage prediction pipelines.
First, we are inter-
ested in uncertainty of the direct predictions of our surrogate for energies, atomic forces, and virial
stresses. Then, we want to push that uncertainty to downstream quantities of interest such as elas-
tic constants and vacancy formation energies, linear functions of surrogate predictions. Both the
(hyper)rectangular sets obtained through univariate methods and the (hyper)ellipsoids of multivari-
ate methods retain their shape under linear transformation. Furthermore, given a linear operator
L ∈RdQ×dY , the propagated set L(Γ(X)) can be found in closed form, so there is no need to push
samples from the set through the transformation. In practice, we approximate the transformations
applied to our original prediction sets. As discussed in Section 4, we will require our surrogate to
make predictions for multiple related atomic configurations, which we form and geometrically relax.
Multivariate conformal uncertainty prediction and propagation will rely on the covariance Σ of these
configurations.
For uncertainty sets to be meaningful in propagated space, we need to understand how conformal
guarantees translate. Let PLΣ1/2 = Σ1/2L⊤ LΣL⊤−1 LΣ1/2, the projection onto the row space of
LΣ1/2. Then,
∥Σ(X)−1/2(Y −µ(X))∥2
≥
∥PLΣ1/2Σ(X)−1/2(Y −µ(X))∥2 ,
=
∥(LΣ(X)L⊤)−1/2(LY −Lµ(X))∥2 .
Equality is achieved when dY = dQ. We conclude that in multivariate conformal with tolerance
αmulti we obtain a coverage guarantee
P (LY ∈L(Γ(X))) ≥1 −αmulti ,
(21)
but the upper bound which guarantees sharpness only translates when L is invertible. Similarly, in
conformal risk control with upper bound αcrc
E [ℓ(L(Γ(X)), Y )] ≤αcrc ,
(22)
and the lower bound is achieved for invertible L. Thus, we expect propagated sets to contain the true
value at a controlled rate, but the conservatism of these sets depends on the particular transformation
L. In multivariate conformal literature, the alternative score
smulti-L = ∥(LΣ(X)L⊤)−1/2(LY −Lµ(X))∥2 ,
(23)
has been proposed [21] to preemptively correct for propagation and achieve both validity and sharp-
ness guarantees. Notably, this score depends on L, i.e. the respective downstream quantity consid-
ered. It thus implies a separate recomputation of the conformalization procedure for each considered
output quantity, which can be costly. We will discuss the tradeoffs of this score in Sections 4 and 5.
4
Experiments
4.1
Synthetic experiments
We first consider a synthetic case study which illustrates the behavior of conformal sets under
propagation. To imitate the workflow of our material science set up, we train a Gaussian process
model on data pairs {(X(i)), Y (i))}n=1000
i=1
. The covariates X ∈R100×100 are drawn from a centered,
unit variance Gaussian distribution.
Rows are independent, but between each column, there is
correlation ρ. X(i) is independent of X(j) whenever i̸ = j. Each column of X(i) is mapped to a
component of Y (i) ∈R100 by a shallow neural network with error function activation and observation
noise variance 10−4.
An additional 1000 data points are generated by the same process to be
used for calibration. We compare two conformal procedures in this example: univariate conformal
with score (13) applied to each component of each Y (i) and multivariate conformal with score (15)
applied to each full vector Y (i).
For both methods, we let the tolerance α range from 0.05 to
0.6. To understand the impact of dimension compression during propagation, we consider linear
transformations into spaces of dimension dQ ∈{5, 10, 15, . . . , 100}. Note that in the last case, the
dimension of Y is preserved under transformation.
We report results averaged over 10 random
propagation operators for each dQ.
Figure 3 relates the full vector coverage of the propagated sets to their volume (standardized by
taking the 1/dth
Q root). Subfigure (a) shows the case when correlation ρ between the covariates of
each component of Y (i) is relatively weak while (b) shows stronger correlation ρ = 0.9. Red squares
9


4.2
Dataset and representation for chemical experiments
Fisher et al
Figure 3.
Synthetic propagation study: Comparison of full vector coverage against volume for prediction sets
propagated into a dimension dQ space. We consider dQ = {5, 10, 15, . . . , 100}, and darker shades indicate larger dQ.
The dimension of the space were conformal calibration is performed (pre-propagation) is 100. We report the average
results from 10 randomly drawn linear propagation operators. Red squares (r. blue circles) scatter points represent
sets constructed via univariate (r. multivariate) conformal prediction. (a): input features X of a given test point
have correlation ρ = 0.3. The solid orange arrow points toward increasing 1 −α while the transparent green arrow
points toward decreasing dQ. (b): input features have correlation ρ = 0.9.
represent univariate conformal and blue circles multivariate conformal. The shade of the markers
darkens as the propagation dimension dQ increases. We can see that for univariate conformal, set
volume is an increasing function of set coverage. Changing ρ or the propagation dimension leads to
only minor variation. In contrast, both ρ and the propagation dimension have a clear impact on the
behavior of multivariate conformal sets. For a given tolerance and propagation dimension, larger
correlation ρ produces smaller sets. We expect this result as the multivariate method can leverage
correlation in Y . For ρ = 0.9, nearly all of the multivariate sets are smaller than the univariate
sets even though, as shown in more detail in Appendix B, many of the multivariate sets produce
greater coverage. Perhaps more surprising is the observation that multivariate set volume becomes
smaller as propagation dimension decreases (along transparent green arrow).
While the square
markers corresponding to univariate conformalized sets show no significant separation according to
propagation dimension, the circular markers of the multivariate approach form clear rows for each
dQ, particularly evident for larger dimensions. Along each row (in the direction of the solid orange
arrow), 1 −α increases, producing greater coverage. We can understand the decrease in set size
with dQ by noting that in smaller dimensions, it is more likely that all components of LY will be
close together than in larger dimensions. However, we also noted in Subsection 3.6 that propagated
conformal sets do not have a sharpness guarantee when the propagation reduces dimension, and we
confirm in Appendix B that sets for small dQ tend to overcover. We also confirm that correcting for
propagation using the score (23) prevents overcoverage. Figure 3 demonstrates that while propagated
multivariate conformal sets may be more conservative than necessary, this effect does not produce
drastic increases in volume.
4.2
Dataset and representation for chemical experiments
In our numerical experiments, we first consider a synthetic case study, then present several examples
based on a silicon dataset which has previously been used to build a general-purpose Gaussian
approximation potential [6]. Specifically, we use diamond-structured configurations in periodic unit
cells.
There are 104 configurations containing 2 atoms, 220 configurations with 16 atoms, 110
configurations with 54 atoms, and 55 configurations with 128 atoms. We also consider diamond
vacancy configurations: 100 configurations with 63 atoms and 111 configurations with 215 atoms.
Typical modern MLIPs would be fit to thousands or, in the case of foundation models, even millions
of configurations. Here, we are interested in the relatively low data setting. Note that the vacancy
configurations do not correspond to the bulk configurations in the dataset–that is, they are not formed
by removing an atom from one of the other configurations in the set. When constructing feature
representations of the configurations, it is crucial to account for the periodic boundary conditions.
We compute SOAP [95, 5, 96] features using the QUIP [101] software package and quippy [102]
interface. Details on all hyperparameters can be found in Appendix A.
For each configuration, the silicon dataset includes density functional theory reference values for
10


4.3
Calibration of energy and atomic forces
Fisher et al
Figure 4.
Energy and atomic force calibration: Verification of the coverage and sharpness guarantees of
conformal prediction for a given tolerance α. Calibration is applied to a vector containing the global energy and
atomic forces for a configuration. (a): fraction of vector components which fall in predictive interval obtained by
univariate (gold triangles) and multivariate (purple circles) conformal prediction. (b): fraction of vectors which fall
entirely within the multivariate predictive set. The y = x line is dotted in gray.
total energy, atomic forces, and virial stresses computed with the CASTEP code as described in
[6]. We use these values to train Gaussian process models, implemented in Julia, and available at
https://github.com/kefisher98/multivariate-conformal/. The properties included in the training set
are determined on a case by case basis. Empirical evidence [4, 103, 104] has shown that including
gradient properties, such as forces and stresses, in machine learning models is beneficial for predicting
gradients in test cases. Theoretical work [105] has suggested that gradient training data may only
aid in the prediction of gradients and can detract from the prediction of function values, i.e. energy.
Furthermore, including gradients significantly increases the dimension of our quantity of interest as
there are three force dimensions per atom in the system. Consequently, we train with forces only
when are goal is to predict forces and train with stresses only when our goal is to predict stresses.
4.3
Calibration of energy and atomic forces
We now consider calibrated uncertainties for high dimensional materials science quantities of interest
and motivate the use of conformal risk control. Our prediction target is the global energy and all
atomic forces for a given atomistic system. The training set consists of 200 configurations randomly
sampled from the silicon diamond configuration dataset. Training vectors therefore range in dimen-
sion from 7 to 385. For efficiency, we use the subset of regressors [106] approximation to build the
training covariance by selecting 30 inducing configurations with the k medoids algorithm [107]. We
find that minor variations in the size of the inducing set and training set produce little change in
prediction performance. A further 120 configurations are set aside as the calibration set, and 80
configurations are used for testing. The latter two sets are randomly selected from the systems with
16, 54, and 162 atoms, so the prediction vectors have dimension between 49 and 385.
Figure 4 verifies the univariate and multivariate conformal guarantees. As expected, both uni-
variate and multivariate conformal achieve their corresponding validity and sharpness guarantees:
the gold triangles representing the performance of the univariate method lie on the y = x line in
plot (a), and the purple circles for the multivariate method trace this line in the plot (b). There is
slightly more noise in the multivariate line in (b) compared to the univariate line in (a) because the
multivariate method effectively has a smaller calibration set. The m = 120 calibration vectors con-
tribute one score each to the multivariate conformal algorithm. In univariate conformal, the energies
and forces are treated separately though both are considered in the evaluation of coverage. Thus,
there are also m = 120 calibration points for the energy predictions, but the univariate conformal
algorithm has > 10, 000 scores to calibrate the force predictions. Figure 4 also provides insight into
the component-wise performance of multivariate methods and the full vector performance of univari-
ate methods. Achieving the required multivariate coverage produces ellipsoidal sets that have near
perfect coverage of individual components (measured by projecting sets into lower dimensions). In
contrast, univariate methods produce zero multivariate coverage for large enough tolerance α. This
behavior makes sense given that the coverage probability for a dY dimensional vector is 1 −dY α.
Lowering α to enforce a high probability of univariate coverage (i.e. applying a Bonferroni correction)
eventually forces nonzero multivariate coverage, but there is not fine grained control over multivariate
11


4.4
Uncertainty propagation to elastic constant prediction
Fisher et al
Figure 5.
Energy and atomic force calibration: Relationship between component-wise coverage, full vector
coverage, and set volume for univariate (gold triangles) and multivariate (purple circles) conformal prediction as well
as conformal risk control with 1-norm (turquoise stars) and quantile (green squares) loss. Both calibration and test
datasets contain atomistic systems of multiple sizes. Consequently, in the test set, vectors containing the global
energy and all atomic forces for a system take on dimensions dY ∈{49, 163, 385}.
performance.
Conformal risk control with an appropriate loss function offers more flexibility when calibrating
high dimensional data. We consider two options: the 1-norm loss given by (19) and the 0.9-quantile
loss given by (20). Appendix C confirms that both losses achieve the risk control guarantees (16). We
set the truncation parameter B to the 0.95-quantile of the calibration losses and show other options in
the appendix. Figure 5 shows how multivariate coverage and set volume relate to univariate coverage
for the four options. We see that the risk control methods indeed have different incentives from the
two conformal prediction approaches.
Both risk control approaches can achieve high univariate
coverage with low multivariate coverage. The threshold of α at which their multivariate coverage
begins to increase is larger than for univariate conformal methods.
As a consequence, the sets
produced by risk control are consistently smaller than univariate conformal hyper-rectangles and
generally smaller than the multivariate hyper-ellipsoids.
4.4
Uncertainty propagation to elastic constant prediction
The elastic constant tensor C characterizes the behavior of a given material under deformation. Both
energy and virial stresses can be mapped to the elastic constant via linear differential operators
C = ∂ς
∂η

η∗
,
ς(η) =
1
V (η)
∂E
∂η ,
(24)
where η is an applied strain and V (η) is the deformed volume. Consequently, using our GAP sur-
rogate and finite difference schemes, we have two routes to estimating elastic constant components:
(1) through a second difference approximation applied to energy predictions and (2) via a first dif-
ference approximation applied to stress predictions. We consider both approaches in this subsection,
applying conformal prediction to the GAP predictions (either energies or stresses) and propagating
uncertainty sets into elastic constant space.
For cubic crystals like silicon, there is additional structure in the elastic constant that we use to
simplify our computations. Specifically, there are several symmetries and zero components:


ς1
ς2
ς3
ς4
ς5
ς6


=


c11
c12
c12
0
0
0
c12
c11
c12
0
0
0
c12
c12
c11
0
0
0
0
0
0
c44
0
0
0
0
0
0
c44
0
0
0
0
0
0
c44




η1
η2
η3
η4
η5
η6


.
(25)
The stress and strain vectors are presented in Voigt notation. Supposing that we have knowledge of
this structure, the value of each unique component can be determined by simultaneously perturbing
η1 and η4. (The derivative found in this scenario will be [c11 c12 c12 c44 0 0]⊤). Thus, we can solve
for all three elastic constants based on the difference in stress of two configurations, a and b.
12


4.4
Uncertainty propagation to elastic constant prediction
Fisher et al
Figure 6.
Propagation to elastic constant uncertainty: Comparison of prediction sets in the space of the
three unique nonzero components of the elastic constant of silicon. α is the specified miscoverage tolerance. The
dotted gray line marks x = y. (a): full vector coverage for component-wise conformal (gold triangles),
Bonferroni-corrected conformal (red +s), and multivariate conformal (purple xs). Calibration was performed in the
space of energies. (b): Same quantities as (a) resulting from calibration performed in the space of stresses. (c): Ratio
between the cube root volume of prediction sets. Red +s (gold triangles) mark the ratio between
Bonferroni-corrected (component-wise) sets and multivariate sets. Ribbons shade the region between the 0.25 and
0.75 quantiles.
If we use route (1) based on energies, we will estimate the six unique stress components for a and
b using a central difference scheme. Each central difference scheme is implemented by perturbing
either a or b to create two further configurations. Using GAP, the geometry of these configurations is
relaxed and the energy is predicted. The relaxation is necessary because of the multilattice structure
of the silicon crystals: Cauchy-Born non-affine shifts between the two sublattices cannot be predicted
solely from applied strain, so atomic positions must be relaxed with respect to a fixed cell. We require
predictions for energy at a total of 24 configurations, perturbed from an equilibrium configuration, to
compute the elastic constant. Thus, we will apply conformal calibration to a 24 dimensional vector,
then project the prediction sets to six dimensional elastic constant space. We further project to
3-dimensional space by selecting the unique, nonzero values c11, c12, and c44.
If, instead, we use route (2), we will first relax the geometries of configurations a and b, then
predict their stresses with the GAP model. This step produces a twelve-dimensional quantity of
interest which we project to the 3-dimensional elastic constant space.
Figure 6 summarizes the performance of propagated prediction sets for elastic constant values,
obtained using vanilla univariate conformal prediction, Bonferroni-corrected conformal, and multi-
variate conformal. Predictions are made by perturbing the equilibrium configuration of a 16 atom
silicon diamond configuration. Results are estimated based on 100 random draws of both the training
and calibration data sets. GAP models which are used to predict energy are trained on 350 diamond
configurations.
The calibration set is based on an additional 100 configurations.
To implement
multivariate conformal, 200 random bags of 24 configurations are drawn with replacement from the
calibration set. This approach is more computationally efficient than perturbing each calibration
configuration 24 times (as is done for test points) and appears to work well. Further discussion
can be found in Appendix D. For GAP models which predict stress, we can include both energy
and stress data in our training set.
To compensate for additional computational cost, we use a
training set of a total of 300 atomistic systems where energy data is included for each system but
stress data is included for only 15 systems. We find that this training set composition is sufficient
to achieve good performance provided the stress training data is sampled from systems sufficiently
close to equilibrium. To calibrate the stress configurations, 350 random bags of size 2 where drawn
with replacement from the calibration set, and the stress predictions of the two configurations were
concatenated. Conformal calibration was applied with tolerances ranging from 0.4 to 0.95.
Plots (a) and (b) within Figure 6 show empirical coverage found for a given lower bound 1 −α.
Since we are evaluating the behavior of multivariate propagated sets, we do not expect any method
to be exactly on the y = x line (simultaneously satisfying both validity and sharpness constraints).
Rather, we expect the multivariate and Bonferroni-corrections to be above y = x, meeting their
validity guarantee. For the univariate approach, neither guarantee is expected to hold though we
expect the stress example to show more coverage at each 1 −α than the energy example because its
finite difference propagation operator L has two nonzeros per row rather than four. The empirical
results confirm these expectations, and we see that the full vector coverage of the univariate approach
13


4.5
Uncertainty propagation to vacancy formation energy prediction
Fisher et al
is considerable lower than the other two methods. For the stress example, we see that both the
multivariate and Bonferroni-corrected methods meet the expected guarantee. The energy example
shows somewhat different behavior: the multivariate method meets the expected guarantee, but the
Bonferroni-corrected coverage is only above the y = x line for smaller 1 −α. The plateau in the
Bonferroni corrected curve occurs because for α ≥0.55, the Bonferroni-correction in the energy
case results in zero tolerance for miscoverage. There is no mechanism for improving coverage by
decreasing α.
The underlying reason for the miscoverage in the Bonferroni curve is likely partially due to the
limited size of our dataset and partially due to the evaluation procedure. Coverage plots such as
(a) and (b) within Figure 6 confirm coverage by determining the fraction of test configurations for
which the DFT reference for elastic constant lies within the 3-dimensional prediction set. While
Equation (24) shows that the elastic constant is obtained from linear differentiation operators ap-
plied to the true energy or true virial stresses, one set of approximations is required to obtain the
DFT prediction, and another set of approximations is made by our GP based workflow. Furthermore,
approximate prediction requires geometric relaxation of perturbed configurations: a nonlinear mini-
mization problem which determines the energy values to be conformalized. Separate relaxations are
performed for the DFT reference and the GP workflow, each respectively employing force predictions
from the corresponding method. Thus, we do not expect conformal guarantees to hold exactly when
we evaluate coverage of the DFT references. For more context, we include cases in Appendix D
where both the Bonferroni and the multivariate approaches undercover while still producing better
coverage than the vanilla univariate method.
We can also compare the volume of the propagated prediction sets. Plot (c) of Figure 6 plots
ratios of the volume (corrected for dimension by taking the cube root) for pairs of methods resulting
from case ii) prediction via stresses. Specifically, the red +s indicate the ratio of Bonferroni-corrected
set volume to multivariate set volume, and the gold triangles represent the ratio of univariate set
volume to multivariate volumes.
The dashed line at unity indicates equal volume.
We can see
that univariate conformal produces the smallest prediction sets.
This finding is not surprising,
considering that this approach systematically fails to achieve the desired coverage guarantees in
contrast to the other methods. Interestingly, in Appendix D, we show cases of prediction of the vector
[c11 c12 c12 c44 0 0]⊤where the multivariate approach produces better coverage than the univariate
approach as well as smaller sets.
The latter result occurs because the multivariate method can
leverage the symmetries of repeated elements. In our present setting, the comparison of the methods
with similar coverage, the Bonferroni-corrected and multivariate approaches, shows that multivariate
sets are consistently smaller than Bonferroni sets. Thus, leveraging covariance predictions to build
ellipsoidal sets produces a size benefit compared at a given coverage level.
4.5
Uncertainty propagation to vacancy formation energy prediction
For our final example, we estimate the energy required to remove an atom from a bulk crystal,
creating a vacancy in the configuration. Recalling that M (i) is the number of atoms in the (i)th
configuration, the vacancy formation energy is the difference
E(i)
formation = E(i)
vacancy −
M (i) −1
M (i)

E(i)
bulk .
(26)
The energies on the right hand side are the global energies before (E(i)
bulk) and after (E(i)
vacancy) the
removal of the atom. We will train a multitask GAP model where the primary task is learning the
energy of bulk diamond configurations, and the secondary task is the energy of the diamond vacancy
systems. Note that our silicon dataset contains examples for both tasks, but for a given (i), we have
either E(i)
bulk or E(i)
vacancy, not both.
The multitask framework can be successfully implemented in this setting, but we would expect
a performance improvement if we filled in the gaps in the training set [36]. For a test structure (j),
we relax the vacancy geometry R(j)
vacancy using the GAP model, then make predictions for the mean
and covariance of [E(j)
bulk E(j)
vacancy]⊤. We apply conformal calibration to the two-dimensional energy
predictions, then propagate the resulting sets to obtain interval predictions for the system’s vacancy
formation energy.
In Figure 7, we compare the performance of four approaches to calibration: vanilla univari-
ate conformal, Bonferroni-corrected univariate conformal, multivariate conformal, and propagation-
corrected multivariate conformal. The latter uses the score (23). We consider this example to be
a reasonable use case for the propagation-corrected score because the transformation from global
energies to vacancy formation energy only depends on system size—unlike our previous example,
14


Fisher et al
Figure 7.
Propagation to vacancy formation energy uncertainty: Coverage and relative volume of
prediction sets propagated to univariate intervals over vacancy formation energy. (a): coverage of propagated
conformal sets produced by univariate (gold triangles), Bonferroni-corrected univariate (red +s), multivariate (purple
xs), and propagation-corrected multivariate (turquoise stars) approaches at tolerance α. The y = x line is dotted in
gray. (b): Gold triangles mark the ratio between univariate and projection corrected multivariate prediction interval
length. Red +s compare Bonferroni-corrected univariate to the projection corrected multivariate method. A dotted
horizontal line marks a ratio of 1. Ribbons shade the region between the 0.25 and 0.75 quantiles.
where the transformation to compute the elastic constant depends on the volume of perturbed con-
figurations. Results are averaged over 25 training and calibration sets randomly drawn for each of 55
near-equilibrium test configurations with either 54 or 128 atoms. For training, we use the energies
of 350 diamond bulk configurations and 150 diamond vacancy configurations. For calibration, we
use 100 additional diamond configurations and 40 additional vacancy configurations, constructing
200 random pairings between the two. We note that we have relatively few vacancy configurations
in the silicon dataset, and ≈150 training configurations appear necessary to achieve secondary task
accuracy comparable to primary task accuracy. More details on the experiment, and results for a
smaller primary training set are reported in Appendix E.
Plot (a) of Figure 7 demonstrates that all methods achieve coverage greater than 1 −α, even
though conformal calibration does not theoretically guarantee this bound.
There are two clear
groupings based on coverage performance: the multivariate approach is similar to the Bonferroni-
correction, and the propagation-corrected approach is similar to the vanilla univariate method. Thus,
the approaches which provide similar full vector coverage at the calibration stage also provide similar
coverage after propagation. Within each pair of methods, modeling seems to produce somewhat more
conservative sets. For α = 0.05, all methods provide complete coverage of test vacancy formation
energies. In plot (b), we compare the width of the prediction interval produced by the propagation-
corrected multivariate approach to both the vanilla and Bonferroni-corrected multivariate methods.
The propagation-corrected intervals are consistently smaller than their univariate counterparts, but
only by a small factor. Unsurprisingly, the Bonferroni-corrected intervals are as much as 2.3 times
as large as the propagation-corrected intervals, and the difference narrows as the coverage of the
two methods converges with decreasing α. We see an outlier in the Bonferroni-corrected volume at
1 −α = 0.9, around where the method achieves complete coverage. Notably, when 1 −α = 0.95 and
all methods reach complete coverage, the widths of the sets produced by the different methods do
not converge. The propagation-corrected multivariate approach produces the sharpest set.
5
Discussion
We use this section to expose the approximations, assumptions, and sources of error present in
our workflow. Based on these observations, we discuss the relevant considerations for choosing a
conformal approach for practical, multistage problems.
5.1
Limited Data
Several challenges arise from data limitations. For one, we implement our materials science examples
based on fewer than one thousand configurations, not all of which are relevant to each problem.
These configurations must be divided between subproblems: hyperparameter optimization, surrogate
training, calibration, and evaluation. While conformal methods provide finite sample guarantees, the
sharpness of the predictive sets depends on the size of the calibration dataset.
15


5.2
Exchangeability
Fisher et al
5.2
Exchangeability
Perhaps a greater challenge than dataset size: for the methods we investigate, the conformal guar-
antees rely on the assumption that the calibration dataset is statistically exchangeable with our test
cases. This assumption is difficult to directly verify for atomistic systems. The generating probability
distribution is unknown, and the practical procedure for sampling new configurations often involves
simulations that make a series of approximations [6].
Rather, we can argue that the success of conformal calibration for sets of energies and forces
reported in Figure 4 provides empirical evidence for the exchangeability of the diamond configurations
in our silicon dataset. However, exchangeability of this dataset is not sufficient for our uncertainty
propagation tests, where the final quantity of interest is based on predictions for perturbations of the
configurations in our original dataset. For instance, one approach to computing the elastic constant
requires us to apply 24 perturbations to one configuration, relax the resulting geometries using our
GAP surrogate, and predict the mean µ and covariance Σ for the energies of these configurations. To
calibrate, we use 24 configurations chosen randomly from the original silicon set; we do not perturb
one configuration 24 times because data generation would be computationally expensive, and our
goal is to investigate conformal methods for an easy to implement workflow. Consequently, we expect
more correlation in our test cases than our calibration set. As synthetic experiments reported in
Appendix B demonstrate, this setting leads multivariate conformal approaches to overcover.
5.3
Approximate workflow
It is likely that our empirical results show a balance of factors which promote over- and under-
coverage. Theoretically, we know that propagated multivariate sets meet a validity guarantee but not
a sharpness guarantee. Our synthetic experiments, shown in more detail in Appendix B, demonstrate
that propagation produces overly conservative sets, and this effect increases with dY /dQ, the ratio
of prediction dimension during conformalisation to the dimension of the propagated quantity of
interest.
This behavior likely combines with the tendency toward overcoverage produced by the
non-exchangeability of our calibration and test set.
These factors may counteract a tendency towards uncercoverage produced by our propagation
and evaluation procedure. Specifically, the propagation operator Ltrue used to obtain the reference
density functional theory (DFT) quantities is not the same finite difference operator Lapprox which we
use apply to our conformal sets. To get a sense of the impact of Lapprox, note that we apply different
approximate operators to predict the elastic constant based on GAP energy predictions and based
on GAP stress predictions, but for both scenarios, we compare to the same reference DFT value.
In the energy based example, which employs an additional stage of approximation, the coverage is
lower. Further note that in Appendix D, we consider a workflow which predicts the same elastic
constant using a larger silicon system and an example which uses a smaller finite difference step size
which performs well in hyperparameter tuning but is farther from the step size which is expected to
balance approximation errors. In these examples, propagated set coverage is partially or completely
below the expected validity guarantee. Relative effects are still present: we see greater coverage in
the stress example than the energy example, and the vanilla univariate approach typically produces
the smallest coverage for a given α. Further, the difference in the performance of multivariate sets
and Bonferroni-corrected sets demonstrates that using the full covariance Σ is a meaningful source
of information for conformal scores.
From these results, we draw several conclusions. First, while the conformal methods are trained
on the errors of GAP surrogate predictions for energy, force, and stress against DFT reference, it
does not capture the full effect of configuration perturbation, surrogate relaxation, and approximate
propagation. Second, the effect of these results is sufficiently small that for reasonable settings, we
achieve expected coverage. Finally, even in the presence of approximation error, we find insight into
the relative behavior of conformal strategies.
5.4
Choosing a conformal method
Each conformal approach offers performance tradeoffs, and the choice of score should be informed
by the problem at hand. Basic univariate methods may be appropriate if component-wise cover-
age is the goal or if covariance information is unavailable. If the covariance is insignificant, but
full vector coverage is required, a Bonferroni correction to a univariate procedure may be suitable.
When covariance estimates with some signal are available, multivariate conformal methods based
on a Mahalanobis distance score are easy to implement to provide similar coverage to the Bonfer-
roni approach with smaller set volume. The resulting sets can capture error cancellations common
in target quantities within materials science. These (hyper)ellipsoidal sets are straightforward to
16


Fisher et al
propagate through a linear operator L, but resulting sets may be overly conservative or impacted by
approximations in L.
If L is known at calibration time, it can be built into the conformal score. Such an approach
essentially propagates the calibration set. Unfortunately, when L depends on the test case, as is
common in materials science, the conformal procedure will require frequent retraining. Furthermore,
in materials science, we are often interested in uncertainty at each stage of a multi-step workflow. In
the general case, applying propagation-corrected conformal prediction produces a pre-propagation
prediction ellipse without validity guarantees, and for additional transformations applied following
L, the resulting prediction sets only have a validity guarantee with no sharpness guarantee—the
same as vanilla multivariate propagation.
Finally, we consider the flexibility offered by conformal risk control. We find that these methods
can be promising for high dimensional calibration targets where covariance information is available.
Tailoring a loss function to our goals can create sets with theoretical guarantees and high univariate
coverage but comparatively low volume. There is a large design space for new loss functions, but
the corresponding danger is that methods may be developed which are overly adapted to a given
problem or dataset. A more complete understanding of the role of conformal risk control in materials
workflows is a compelling direction for future research.
6
Conclusion
Our experiments uncover both the utility and potential pitfalls that arise when conformal methods
are built into a multivariate, multistage workflow. We aim to build a bridge between the theoretical
development of conformal strategies and their practical use within materials science. For this reason,
we focus on methods which can be efficiently applied to high dimensional targets Y and propagated
to downstream quantities of interest Q. As baselines, we consider two approaches which calibrate
each component of Y individually: one to achieve target univariate coverage of Y and another to
achieve target full coverage. Neither of these methods use surrogate predictions for the correlation
in Y , so the resulting sets may include unnecessary corners which inflate their volume. We show
that multivariate approaches based on the Mahalanobis distance are easy to implement and produce
ellipsoidal sets conducive to uncertainty propagation. These approaches can leverage estimates of
the correlation between different configurations and between properties, in some cases discovering
near symmetries and thereby considerably reducing set volume. Thus, elliptical conformal sets can
capture error cancellations common in predictions of relative properties in materials science. Finally,
we examine the validity of propagated sets to predict elastic constant components and vacancy
formation energies, discussing the impact of approximations in our workflow.
There are many viable directions for future inquiry to build on our results. While our experiments
consider the calibration of Gaussian process surrogates, conformal prediction is model agnostic, so
these methods can straightforwardly be incorporated in a neural network workflow. Further, much
work [108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113] has explored conformal approaches robust to distribution shift
which will be useful for many workflows based on atomistic data.
For interpretation of results,
it will be useful to analyze class conditional or relative representations of uncertainty given by
conformal sets. Finally, the generalization to conformal risk control allows for great flexibility in the
development of new uncertainty guarantees. We believe that intricate materials science prediction
pipelines will draw from an extensive toolbox of methods.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Stephen Bates and Niklas Schmitz for productive conversations. Further, the
authors acknowledge the MIT Libraries for the resources provided and the MIT Office of Research
Computing and Data for providing high performance computing resources that have contributed to
the research results reported within this paper.
Funding
MFH acknowledges support by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF, Grant No. 10002757)
as well as the NCCR MARVEL, a National Centre of Competence in Research, funded by the SNSF
(Grant No. 205602). KEF expresses gratitude for the support by the Don Loomis Galusha (1904)
Fellowship from the MIT Office of Graduate Education as well as the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship (Grant No. 1745302). KEF and YMM acknowledge support from
the Department of Energy (DOE), National Nuclear Security Administration PSAAP-III program
(award number DE-NA0003965) and PSAAP-IV program (award number DE-NA0004266).
17


REFERENCES
Fisher et al
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in multivariate-conformal at
https://github.com/kefisher98/multivariate-conformal/.
References
[1]
Volker L. Deringer, Miguel A. Caro, and G´abor Cs´anyi. “Machine Learning Interatomic
Potentials as Emerging Tools for Materials Science”. In: Advanced Materials 31.46 (2019),
p. 1902765. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201902765. eprint: https://advanced.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/adma.201902765. url: https://advanced.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adma.201902765.
[2]
Tim Mueller, Alberto Hernandez, and Chuhong Wang. “Machine learning for interatomic
potential models”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 152.5 (Feb. 2020), p. 050902. issn:
0021-9606. doi: 10.1063/1.5126336. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5126336.
[3]
Silvan K¨aser et al. “Neural network potentials for chemistry: concepts, applications and
prospects”. In: Digital Discovery 2 (1 2023), pp. 28–58. doi: 10.1039/D2DD00102K. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D2DD00102K.
[4]
Albert P. Bart´ok et al. “Gaussian Approximation Potentials: The Accuracy of Quantum
Mechanics, without the Electrons”. In: Physical Review Letters 104 (13 Apr. 2010). doi:
10.1103/physrevlett.104.136403. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.
104.136403.
[5]
Albert P. Bart´ok and G´abor Cs´anyi. “Gaussian approximation potentials: A brief tutorial
introduction”. In: International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 115 (16 Aug. 2015), pp. 1051–
1057. doi: 10.1002/qua.24927. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/qua.24927.
[6]
Albert P. Bart´ok et al. “Machine Learning a General-Purpose Interatomic Potential for Sili-
con”. In: Phys. Rev. X 8 (4 Dec. 2018), p. 041048. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.8.041048. url:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.8.041048.
[7]
Albert P. Bart´ok and G´abor Cs´anyi. Gaussian Approximation Potentials: a brief tutorial
introduction. 2020. arXiv: 1502.01366 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1502.01366.
[8]
Jamie Simon et al. There Will Be a Scientific Theory of Deep Learning. 2026. arXiv: 2604.
21691 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.21691.
[9]
Katharine Fisher and Youssef Marzouk. Can Bayesian Neural Networks Make Confident Pre-
dictions? url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.11773. 2025. arXiv: 2501.11773 [stat.ML].
[10]
Vladimir Vovk, Alex Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. “Algorithmic Learning in a Random
World”. In: Jan. 2005. doi: 10.1007/b106715.
[11]
Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. 2007. arXiv: 0706.3188
[cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/0706.3188.
[12]
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A Gentle Introduction to Conformal Pre-
diction and Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification. 2022. arXiv: 2107.07511 [cs.LG].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07511.
[13]
Yuge Hu et al. “Robust and scalable uncertainty estimation with conformal prediction for
machine-learned interatomic potentials”. In: Machine Learning: Science and Technology 3.4
(Dec. 2022), p. 045028. doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/aca7b1. url: https://doi.org/10.1088/
2632-2153/aca7b1.
[14]
I. R. Best, T. J. Sullivan, and J. R. Kermode. “Uncertainty quantification in atomistic sim-
ulations of silicon using interatomic potentials”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 161.6
(Aug. 2024). issn: 1089-7690. doi: 10.1063/5.0214590. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/
5.0214590.
[15]
Iain Best. “Uncertainty quantification with machine learning interatomic potentials using
conformal prediction”. Unpublished. Oct. 2024. url: http://webcat.warwick.ac.uk/
record=b4154025.
[16]
Viktor Zaverkin et al. “Uncertainty-biased molecular dynamics for learning uniformly accurate
interatomic potentials”. In: npj Computational Materials 10.1 (Apr. 2024), p. 83. issn: 2057-
3960. doi: 10.1038/s41524-024-01254-1. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-
01254-1.
18


REFERENCES
Fisher et al
[17]
Victor Dheur et al. “A Unified Comparative Study with Generalized Conformity Scores for
Multi-Output Conformal Regression”. In: Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference
on Machine Learning. Ed. by Aarti Singh et al. Vol. 267. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research. PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025, pp. 13444–13485. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v267/dheur25a.html.
[18]
Xiaofan Zhou et al. Conformal Prediction: A Data Perspective. 2025. arXiv: 2410.06494
[cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06494.
[19]
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos et al. Conformal Risk Control. 2025. arXiv: 2208.02814 [stat.ME].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.02814.
[20]
Chancellor Johnstone and Bruce Cox. Conformal Uncertainty Sets for Robust Optimization.
2021. arXiv: 2105.14957 [stat.ME]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.14957.
[21]
Sacha Braun et al. Multivariate Standardized Residuals for Conformal Prediction. 2026. arXiv:
2507.20941 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.20941.
[22]
Guillaume Principato et al. Conformal Prediction for Hierarchical Data. 2025. arXiv: 2411.
13479 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.13479.
[23]
Lin Lin, Jianfeng Lu, and Lexing Ying. “Numerical methods for Kohn–Sham density func-
tional theory”. In: Acta Numerica 28 (2019), pp. 405–539. doi: 10.1017/S0962492919000047.
[24]
Chi Chen and Shyue Ping Ong. “A universal graph deep learning interatomic potential for
the periodic table”. In: Nature Computational Science 2.11 (Nov. 2022), pp. 718–728. issn:
2662-8457. doi: 10.1038/s43588-022-00349-3. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-
022-00349-3.
[25]
Yutack Park et al. “Scalable Parallel Algorithm for Graph Neural Network Interatomic Poten-
tials in Molecular Dynamics Simulations”. In: Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation
20.11 (June 2024), pp. 4857–4868. issn: 1549-9618. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.4c00190. url:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.4c00190.
[26]
Simon Batzner et al. “E(3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-efficient and accurate
interatomic potentials”. In: Nature Communications 13.1 (May 2022), p. 2453. issn: 2041-
1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29939-5. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-
29939-5.
[27]
Ziduo Yang et al. “Efficient equivariant model for machine learning interatomic potentials”. In:
npj Computational Materials 11.1 (Feb. 2025), p. 49. issn: 2057-3960. doi: 10.1038/s41524-
025-01535-3. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01535-3.
[28]
Ilyes Batatia et al. “A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry”. In: The Journal of
Chemical Physics 163.18 (Nov. 2025), p. 184110. issn: 0021-9606. doi: 10.1063/5.0297006.
[29]
Agustinus Kristiadi et al. A Sober Look at LLMs for Material Discovery: Are They Actually
Good for Bayesian Optimization Over Molecules? 2024. arXiv: 2402.05015 [cs.LG]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05015.
[30]
Sanjeev Arora et al. Harnessing the Power of Infinitely Wide Deep Nets on Small-data Tasks.
2019. arXiv: 1910.01663 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01663.
[31]
Jaehoon Lee et al. “Finite versus infinite neural networks: an empirical study”. In: Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS ’20.
Vancouver, BC, Canada: Curran Associates Inc., 2020. isbn: 9781713829546.
[32]
Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan et al. “Simple, fast, and flexible framework for matrix com-
pletion with infinite width neural networks”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 119.16 (2022), e2115064119. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2115064119. eprint: https://
www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.2115064119. url: https://www.pnas.org/doi/
abs/10.1073/pnas.2115064119.
[33]
SIYUAN MA and Mikhail Belkin. “Diving into the shallows: a computational perspective on
large-scale shallow learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by
I. Guyon et al. Vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. url: https://proceedings.neurips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/bf424cb7b0dea050a42b9739eb261a3a-Paper.pdf.
[34]
Giacomo Meanti et al. “Kernel methods through the roof: handling billions of points effi-
ciently”. In: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems. NIPS ’20. Vancouver, BC, Canada: Curran Associates Inc., 2020. isbn:
9781713829546.
19


REFERENCES
Fisher et al
[35]
Haitao Liu et al. “When Gaussian process meets big data: A review of scalable GPs”. In:
IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 31.11 (2020), pp. 4405–4423.
[36]
K. E. Fisher, M. F. Herbst, and Y. M. Marzouk. “Multitask methods for predicting molecular
properties from heterogeneous data”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 161.1 (July 2024),
p. 014114. issn: 0021-9606. doi: 10.1063/5.0201681. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.
0201681.
[37]
Danial Khatamsaz, Brent Vela, and Raymundo Arr´oyave. “Multi-objective Bayesian alloy
design using multi-task Gaussian processes”. In: Materials Letters 351 (2023), p. 135067.
issn: 0167-577X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2023.135067. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167577X23012521.
[38]
Stephen M. Goodlett, Justin M. Turney, and Henry F. Schaefer. “Comparison of multifidelity
machine learning models for potential energy surfaces”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics
159 (4 July 2023). doi: 10.1063/5.0158919. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/5.0158919.
[39]
G. Pilania, J.E. Gubernatis, and T. Lookman. “Multi-fidelity machine learning models for
accurate bandgap predictions of solids”. In: Computational Materials Science 129 (2017),
pp. 156–162. doi: 10.1016/j.commatsci.2016.12.004. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.commatsci.2016.12.004.
[40]
R. Batra et al. “Multifidelity Information Fusion with Machine Learning: A Case Study of
Dopant Formation Energies in Hafnia”. In: ACS Applied Materials & Inference 11 (2019),
pp. 24906–24918. doi: 10.1021/acsami.9b02174. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.9b02174.
[41]
Abhirup Patra et al. “A multi-fidelity information-fusion approach to machine learn and
predict polymer bandgap”. In: Computational Materials Science 172 (2020), p. 109286. issn:
0927-0256. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2019.109286. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927025619305853.
[42]
Clyde Fare et al. “A multi-fidelity machine learning approach to high throughput materials
screening”. In: npj Computational Materials 8.1 (Dec. 2022), p. 257. issn: 2057-3960. doi:
10.1038/s41524-022-00947-9. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-022-00947-9.
[43]
Vivin Vinod et al. “Multifidelity Machine Learning for Molecular Excitation Energies”. In:
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 19.21 (2023). PMID: 37862054, pp. 7658–7670.
doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.3c00882.
[44]
Vivin Vinod, Ulrich Kleinekath¨ofer, and Peter Zaspel. Optimized Multifidelity Machine Learn-
ing for Quantum Chemistry. 2023. arXiv: 2312.05661 [physics.chem-ph].
[45]
Vivin Vinod and Peter Zaspel. “QeMFi: A Multifidelity Dataset of Quantum Chemical Prop-
erties of Diverse Molecules”. In: Scientific Data 12.1 (Feb. 2025), p. 202. issn: 2052-4463. doi:
10.1038/s41597-024-04247-3. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-024-04247-3.
[46]
Vivin Vinod and Peter Zaspel. Improvise, Adapt, Overcome: An On-The-Fly Multifidelity
Algorithm for Efficient Machine Learning. 2026. arXiv: 2606.02662 [cs.LG]. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2606.02662.
[47]
Raghunathan Ramakrishnan et al. “Big Data Meets Quantum Chemistry Approximations:
The ∆-Machine Learning Approach”. In: Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 11
(5 May 2015), pp. 2087–2096. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00099. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00099.
[48]
Pavlo O. Dral et al. “Hierarchical machine learning of potential energy surfaces”. In: The
Journal of Chemical Physics 152 (20 May 2020). doi: 10.1063/5.0006498. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1063/5.0006498.
[49]
Pavlo O Dral, Tetiana Zubatiuk, and Bao-Xin Xue. “Learning from multiple quantum chem-
ical methods: ∆-learning, transfer learning, co-kriging, and beyond”. In: Quantum Chemistry
in the Age of Machine Learning. Elsevier, 2023, pp. 491–507.
[50]
Tom Fr¨ombgen et al. “Uncertainty Quantification for In Silico Chemistry”. In: Chemical
Reviews 126.7 (2026), pp. 4189–4236. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.5c00931.
20


REFERENCES
Fisher et al
[51]
Yan Wang and David L. McDowell. “1 - Uncertainty quantification in materials modeling”. In:
Uncertainty Quantification in Multiscale Materials Modeling. Ed. by Yan Wang and David
L. McDowell. Elsevier Series in Mechanics of Advanced Materials. Woodhead Publishing,
2020, pp. 1–40. isbn: 978-0-08-102941-1. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 0- 08-
102941- 1.00001- 8. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780081029411000018.
[52]
Federico Grasselli et al. Uncertainty in the era of machine learning for atomistic modeling.
2025. arXiv: 2503.09196 [physics.chem-ph]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.09196.
[53]
Thomas D Swinburne and Danny Perez. “Parameter uncertainties for imperfect surrogate
models in the low-noise regime”. In: Machine Learning: Science and Technology 6.1 (Jan.
2025), p. 015008. doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/ad9fce. url: https://doi.org/10.1088/2632-
2153/ad9fce.
[54]
Jakob Gawlikowski et al. “A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks”. In: Artif. Intell.
Rev. 56.Suppl 1 (July 2023), pp. 1513–1589. issn: 0269-2821. doi: 10.1007/s10462-023-
10562-9. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10562-9.
[55]
Wenchong He et al. “A Survey on Uncertainty Quantification Methods for Deep Learning”.
In: 58.7 (Feb. 2026). issn: 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3786319. url: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3786319.
[56]
Pavel Izmailov et al. What Are Bayesian Neural Network Posteriors Really Like? 2021. arXiv:
2104.14421 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14421.
[57]
Aik Rui Tan et al. “Single-model uncertainty quantification in neural network potentials
does not consistently outperform model ensembles”. In: npj Computational Materials 9.1
(Dec. 2023), p. 225. issn: 2057-3960. doi: 10.1038/s41524- 023- 01180- 8. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41524-023-01180-8.
[58]
Matias Valdenegro-Toro. “Sub-Ensembles for Fast Uncertainty Estimation in Neural Net-
works”. In: 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (IC-
CVW). 2023, pp. 4121–4129. doi: 10.1109/ICCVW60793.2023.00445.
[59]
Stefan Lee et al. Why M Heads are Better than One: Training a Diverse Ensemble of Deep
Networks. 2015. arXiv: 1511.06314 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06314.
[60]
Matthias Kellner and Michele Ceriotti. “Uncertainty quantification by direct propagation of
shallow ensembles”. In: Machine Learning: Science and Technology 5.3 (July 2024), p. 035006.
doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/ad594a. url: https://doi.org/10.1088/2632-2153/ad594a.
[61]
Matthias Kellner et al. Errors that matter: Uncertainty-aware universal machine-learning
potentials calibrated on experiments. 2026. arXiv: 2604 . 24607 [physics.chem-ph]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.24607.
[62]
Moritz Sch¨afer et al. “How to Train a Shallow Ensemble”. In: Journal of Chemical Theory and
Computation 22.10 (May 2026), pp. 4939–4950. issn: 1549-9618. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.
6c00310. eprint: https://pubs.acs.org/jctcce/article-pdf/22/10/4939/65435202/
ct6c00310.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.6c00310.
[63]
Leonid Kahle and Federico Zipoli. “Quality of uncertainty estimates from neural network
potential ensembles”. In: Phys. Rev. E 105 (1 Jan. 2022), p. 015311. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.
105.015311. url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.105.015311.
[64]
Shuaihua Lu et al. On the Uncertainty Estimates of Equivariant-Neural-Network-Ensembles
Interatomic Potentials. 2023. arXiv: 2309.00195 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2309.00195.
[65]
Niklas Frederik Schmitz, Bruno Ploumhans, and Michael F. Herbst. Algorithmic differentia-
tion for plane-wave DFT: materials design, error control and learning model parameters. 2025.
arXiv: 2509.07785 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.07785.
[66]
Jelmer Neeven and Evgueni Smirnov. “Conformal stacked weather forecasting”. In: Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Workshop on Conformal and Probabilistic Prediction and Applications.
Ed. by Alex Gammerman et al. Vol. 91. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR,
Nov. 2018, pp. 220–233.
21


REFERENCES
Fisher et al
[67]
Kamile Stankeviciute, Ahmed M. Alaa, and Mihaela van der Schaar. “Conformal Time-series
Forecasting”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by M. Ranzato et
al. Vol. 34. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021, pp. 6216–6228. url: https : / / proceedings .
neurips . cc / paper _ files / paper / 2021 / file / 312f1ba2a72318edaaa995a67835fad5 -
Paper.pdf.
[68]
Alexander Timans et al. Adaptive Bounding Box Uncertainties via Two-Step Conformal Pre-
diction. 2024. arXiv: 2403.07263 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07263.
[69]
Alexander Timans et al. Max-Rank: Efficient Multiple Testing for Conformal Prediction. 2025.
arXiv: 2311.10900 [stat.ME]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.10900.
[70]
Zhendong Wang et al. “Probabilistic Conformal Prediction Using Conditional Random Sam-
ples”. In: Proceedings of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics. Ed. by Francisco Ruiz, Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem van de Meent. Vol. 206. Pro-
ceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, Apr. 2023, pp. 8814–8836.
[71]
Mauricio Sadinle, Jing Lei, and Larry Wasserman. “Least Ambiguous Set-Valued Classifiers
With Bounded Error Levels”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 114.525
(2018), pp. 223–234. issn: 1537-274X. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2017.1395341. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2017.1395341.
[72]
Rafael Izbicki, Gilson Shimizu, and Rafael B. Stern. “CD-split and HPD-split: efficient con-
formal regions in high dimensions”. In: 23.1 (Jan. 2022). issn: 1532-4435.
[73]
Max Sampson and Kung-Sik Chan. Flexible Conformal Highest Predictive Conditional Density
Sets. 2025. arXiv: 2406.18052 [stat.ME]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.18052.
[74]
Jing Lei, Alessandro Rinaldo, and Larry Wasserman. “A conformal prediction approach to
explore functional data”. In: Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence 74.1 (June
2015), pp. 29–43. issn: 1573-7470. doi: 10.1007/s10472-013-9366-6. url: https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10472-013-9366-6.
[75]
Chen Xu, Hanyang Jiang, and Yao Xie. “Conformal prediction for multi-dimensional time
series by ellipsoidal sets”. In: Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning. Ed. by Ruslan Salakhutdinov et al. Vol. 235. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024, pp. 55076–55099. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v235/xu24m.html.
[76]
Louis Meyer and Wenkai Xu. A Kernel Nonconformity Score for Multivariate Conformal
Prediction. 2026. arXiv: 2604.21595 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.21595.
[77]
Sacha Braun et al. Minimum Volume Conformal Sets for Multivariate Regression. 2026. arXiv:
2503.19068 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19068.
[78]
Michal Klein et al. Multivariate Conformal Prediction using Optimal Transport. 2025. arXiv:
2502.03609 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03609.
[79]
Gauthier Thurin, Kimia Nadjahi, and Claire Boyer. Optimal Transport-based Conformal Pre-
diction. 2025. arXiv: 2501.18991 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.18991.
[80]
Eugene Ndiaye. Beyond Uncertainty Sets: Leveraging Optimal Transport to Extend Conformal
Predictive Distribution to Multivariate Settings. 2025. arXiv: 2511.15146 [stat.ML]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.15146.
[81]
Soundouss Messoudi, S´ebastien Destercke, and Sylvain Rousseau. Copula-based conformal
prediction for Multi-Target Regression. 2021. arXiv: 2101.12002 [cs.LG]. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2101.12002.
[82]
Ji Won Park, Robert Tibshirani, and Kyunghyun Cho. Semiparametric conformal prediction.
2025. arXiv: 2411.02114 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02114.
[83]
Sophia Sun and Rose Yu. Copula Conformal Prediction for Multi-step Time Series Forecast-
ing. 2024. arXiv: 2212.03281 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.03281.
[84]
Shai Feldman, Stephen Bates, and Yaniv Romano. Calibrated Multiple-Output Quantile Re-
gression with Representation Learning. 2022. arXiv: 2110.00816 [cs.LG]. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2110.00816.
[85]
Ander Gray et al. Guaranteed prediction sets for functional surrogate models. 2025. arXiv:
2501.18426 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.18426.
22


REFERENCES
Fisher et al
[86]
Laura L¨utzow et al. Zono-Conformal Prediction: Zonotope-Based Uncertainty Quantification
for Regression and Classification Tasks. 2025. arXiv: 2508.11025 [cs.LG]. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2508.11025.
[87]
Abuzar Khan et al. “Smart sensing-enabled risk-aware nitrogen prescriptions via confor-
mal profit bounds for precision agriculture”. In: Frontiers in Plant Science Volume 17 -
2026 (2026). issn: 1664-462X. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2026.1821003. url: https://www.
frontiersin.org/journals/plant-science/articles/10.3389/fpls.2026.1821003.
[88]
Sanbao Su et al. Collaborative Multi-Object Tracking with Conformal Uncertainty Propagation.
2024. arXiv: 2303.14346 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14346.
[89]
Vladimir Vovk and Claus Bendtsen. “Conformal predictive decision making”. In: Proceedings
of the Seventh Workshop on Conformal and Probabilistic Prediction and Applications. Ed. by
Alex Gammerman et al. Vol. 91. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, Nov.
2018, pp. 52–62. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v91/vovk18b.html.
[90]
Tian Bai et al. Multivariate Conformal Selection. 2025. arXiv: 2505.00917 [stat.ME]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00917.
[91]
Tian Bai and Ying Jin. Conformal Selective Prediction with General Risk Control. 2026. arXiv:
2603.24704 [stat.ME]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.24704.
[92]
Han Wang and Chao Ning. Conformal Prediction in The Loop: A Feedback-Based Uncertainty
Model for Trajectory Optimization. 2025. arXiv: 2510.16376 [math.OC]. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2510.16376.
[93]
Santiago Cortes-Gomez et al. Utility-Directed Conformal Prediction: A Decision-Aware Frame-
work for Actionable Uncertainty Quantification. 2025. arXiv: 2410 . 01767 [cs.LG]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01767.
[94]
Stefan Haas and Eyke H¨ullermeier. “Conformalized prescriptive machine learning for uncertainty-
aware automated decision making: the case of goodwill requests”. In: International Jour-
nal of Data Science and Analytics 20.3 (Sept. 2025), pp. 2061–2077. issn: 2364-4168. doi:
10.1007/s41060-024-00573-2. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s41060-024-00573-2.
[95]
Albert P. Bart´ok, Risi Kondor, and G´abor Cs´anyi. “On representing chemical environments”.
In: Physical Review B 87 (18 May 2013), p. 184115. doi: 10.1103/physrevb.87.184115.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/physrevb.87.184115.
[96]
Felix Musil et al. “Physics-Inspired Structural Representations for Molecules and Materials”.
In: Chemical Reviews 121.16 (2021), pp. 9759–9815. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00021.
[97]
C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning. the MIT
Press, 2006. isbn: 026218253X. url: www.GaussianProcess.org/gpml.
[98]
M. Kennedy and A O’Hagan. “Predicting the Output from a Complex Computer Code When
Fast Approximations Are Available”. In: Biometrika 87.1 (2000), pp. 1–13. doi: 10.1093/
biomet/87.1.1.
[99]
E.V. Bonilla, K.M.A Chai, and C.K.I. Williams. “Multi-task Gaussian process prediction”.
In: Advances in neural information processing systems. Ed. by J.C. Platt et al. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2008, pp. 153–160.
[100]
G. Leen, J. Peltonen, and S. Kaski. “Focused multi-task learning in a Gaussian process frame-
work”. In: Machine Learning 1-2 (89 2012), pp. 157–182. doi: 10.1007/s10994-012-5302-y.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10994-012-5302-y.
[101]
G´abor Cs´anyi et al. “Expressive Programming for Computational Physics in Fortran 95+”.
In: IoP Comput. Phys. Newsletter (2007), Spring 2007.
[102]
James R Kermode. “f90wrap: an automated tool for constructing deep Python interfaces to
modern Fortran codes”. In: J. Phys. Condens. Matter (Mar. 2020). issn: 0953-8984, 1361-
648X. doi: 10.1088/1361-648X/ab82d2.
[103]
Soohaeng Yoo Willow et al. Bayesian E(3)-Equivariant Interatomic Potential with Itera-
tive Restratification of Many-body Message Passing. 2026. arXiv: 2510.03046 [cs.LG]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03046.
[104]
Moritz Sch¨afer et al. “How to Train a Shallow Ensemble”. In: Journal of Chemical Theory
and Computation 22.10 (May 2026), pp. 4939–4950. issn: 1549-9618. doi: 10.1021/acs.
jctc.6c00310. url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.6c00310.
23


REFERENCES
Fisher et al
[105]
Katharine E Fisher et al. Precise asymptotic analysis of Sobolev training for random feature
models. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.03050. 2025. arXiv: 2511.03050 [stat.ML].
[106]
Alex Smola and Peter Bartlett. “Sparse Greedy Gaussian Process Regression”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by T. Leen, T. Dietterich, and V. Tresp. Vol. 13.
MIT Press, 2000. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2000/
file/3214a6d842cc69597f9edf26df552e43-Paper.pdf.
[107]
Leonard Kaufmann and Peter Rousseeuw. “Clustering by Means of Medoids”. In: Data Anal-
ysis based on the L1-Norm and Related Methods (Jan. 1987), pp. 405–416.
[108]
Aleksandr Podkopaev and Aaditya Ramdas. Distribution-free uncertainty quantification for
classification under label shift. 2021. arXiv: 2103.03323 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2103.03323.
[109]
Ryan J. Tibshirani et al. Conformal Prediction Under Covariate Shift. 2020. arXiv: 1904.
06019 [stat.ME]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.06019.
[110]
Asaf Gendler et al. “Adversarially Robust Conformal Prediction”. In: International Con-
ference on Learning Representations. 2022. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
9L1BsI4wP1H.
[111]
Jase Clarkson et al. Split Conformal Prediction under Data Contamination. 2025. arXiv:
2407.07700 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07700.
[112]
Maxime Cauchois et al. “Robust Validation: Confident Predictions Even When Distributions
Shift”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 119.548 (Feb. 2024), pp. 3033–
3044. issn: 1537-274X. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2023.2298037. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/01621459.2023.2298037.
[113]
Liviu Aolaritei et al. Conformal Prediction under Levy-Prokhorov Distribution Shifts: Robust-
ness to Local and Global Perturbations. 2025. arXiv: 2502.14105 [stat.ML]. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2502.14105.
[114]
Tobin A. Driscoll and Richard J. Braun. Fundamentals of Numerical Computation. Philadel-
phia, PA, USA: SIAM-Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2017. isbn: 1611975077.
24


Fisher et al
A
Hyperparameter settings
Since our workflow combines several computational tools, we have multiple hyperparameter cate-
gories:
• SOAP hyperparameters: We set these hyperparamters based on best practices in literature [6,
96] and previous experience [36]. The cutoff radius which defines atomic neighborhoods is set
to 5 angstroms. Each atom is represented by a Gaussian function with variance 0.25. Finally,
the spherical harmonics expansion is truncated according to nmax = 8 and ℓmax = 6.
• Gaussian process kernel hyperparameters: We choose a polynomial kernel with exponent 4,
which has been shown to be effective for Gaussian approximation potentials [4, 5, 6, 7]. The
kernel function introduces hyperparameters variance v and normalization c in addition to the
data noise standard deviation γ. Note that because the model’s predictive covariance Σ is
rescaled by conformal calibration, the absolute scale of Σ does not impact our final predictions.
Then, the predictive µ and Σ depend only on the composite scalar hyperparameter γ2/(cv).
We find that the accuracy of the Gaussian process potential is sensitive to the scale of this
parameter, but optimization of the precise value produces diminishing returns and risks overfit-
ting. Consequently, we set aside a small optimization dataset of 20 configurations and perform
a line search on powers of γ2/(cv) = 10a for a ∈{−12, . . . , 0, 1}, evaluating performance on
energy prediction with leave one out cross validation. Ultimately, we find a = −8.
• Multitask hyperparameters: In our examples, the bulk diamond configurations will inform the
primary task, and the vacancy configurations will inform the secondary task. This designation is
made because the primary tasks hyperparameters can be optimized independently; thus, we are
able to reuse the optimal values already found for the bulk diamond configurations, as described
above. For both tasks, we will use polynomial kernels with quartic exponents. Again noting
that conformal calibration makes our results insensitive to the absolute scale of the predictive
covariance, we find that the remaining hyperparameters are the ratio of primary and secondary
kernel variance vp/vs and the correlation ϱs. Using the 20 configuration primary optimization
set and 10 additional vacancy configurations set aside for secondary task optimization, we
perform a 2-dimensional line search using leave one out cross validation. We find a narrow
basin of low error for ϱs ≥0.95 and large vp/vs and a wide basin of low error about ϱs = 0.5
and vp/vs ≈1. To avoid overfitting, we set vp/vs = 1 and ϱs = 0.55.
• Finite difference hyperparameters: We will propagate uncertainty sets using a central difference
approximation and must choose the step size. For one set of tests, we will use the differences
of energies for perturbed configurations to predict stress, then use the differences of stresses
to predict the elastic constant tensor for silicon. For another set of tests, we directly predict
stress with a Gaussian process model, then apply a finite difference scheme to predict the
elastic constant. Since each configuration has the same elastic constant and it is our target
for prediction, we cannot optimize hyperparameters based on their performance predicting the
elastic constant. Rather, we optimize based on error in stress prediction, using leave one out
cross validation on the 20 configuration optimization set. To balance errors in an order m
finite difference approximation, the step size should be chosen to be about 1/(m + 1) root of
the surrogate error [114]. Since central difference is a second order approximation and the
Gaussian process produces errors on order of 0.005 eV, we perform a line search of step sizes
between 10−4 and 0.5. For our experiments, we choose step size 0.05, and in Appendix D, we
present additional results for step size 0.01, another well performing value.
• Conformal hyperparameters: The character of conformal sets is controlled by the tolerance
α. Conformal risk control may introduce additional loss function parameters, including the
upper bound B. In general, we will choose B to be some quantile of the calibration losses. We
perform tests for a range of conformal parameters and present representative results.
Overall, we aim to select hyperparameters using minimal data and to avoid overfitting.
25


Fisher et al
B
Additional results of synthetic experiment
Figure 8.
Synthetic propagation study: Full vector coverage of propagated conformal sets. Calibration is
applied to a 100 dimensional vector, and sets are propagated via linear transformation dimension
d ∈{5, 10, . . . , 95, 100}. Color indicates d, more brown is smaller and more blue is larger. Results are averaged over
10 random propagation operators. The performance of component-wise conformal calibration is reported in the left
column, and multivariate conformal results are in the right. ρ indicates the correlation of the covariates of the
components of each vector which is calibrated.
The results in Figure 8 complement those shown in Section 4.1. Specifically, we examine the
coverage a propagated prediction set where the propagation dimension dQ varies from 5 to 100. The
left column shows the performance of univariate conformal prediction, while the right column reports
the results for multivariate methods. The propagated univariate conformal sets often fail to achieve
the desired coverage level 1 −α. This effect is exacerbated for smaller covariate correlation ρ = 0.3
or larger tolerance α. As α →0, the low tolerance forces the univariate conformal prediction sets to
achieve high coverage, but the price is the larger volume sets reported in Figure 3. The propagated
sets produced by multivariate conformal methods achieve the desired coverage, but as dQ descreases,
these sets become increasingly conservative.
Using propagation-corrected multivariate conformal prediction is expected to alleviate this conser-
vatism. This approach provides a sharpness bound on the propagated set, but it requires knowledge
of the propagation operator at the time of calibration. Figure 9 confirms that for all dQ consid-
ered, the propagation-corrected approach produces sets that satisfy both the coverage and sharpness
guarantees.
For our synthetic tests, we have assumed that for both the calibration and testing data, the
elements in each multivariate covariate have the same correlation level ρ.
We now consider the
case where there is ρ = 0 correlation in the covariate elements for the calibration set and ρ = 0.99
correlation in the covariate elements of the test set. These settings represent an extreme case, but
we do expect some disparity in the correlation of our calibration and test sets for our elastic constant
experiment. This disparity arise because the test set is created by applying small perturbations to the
geometry of one system, and the difference in geometry of any two calibration structures is larger than
this perturbation. In Figure 10, we see that the propagated sets achieve the desired coverage level
but are consistently over-conservative. This effect occurs for both the basic (a) and propagation-
corrected (b) forms of multivariate conformal prediction.
The misspecification in calibration set
covariance reduces the difference in performance between the two methods.
26


Fisher et al
Figure 9.
Synthetic propagation study: Full vector coverage of multivariate conformal calibration with
propagation correction. As in Figure 8, calibration is performed on a 100 dimensional vector which propagated into
space with dimension d ∈{5, 10, . . . , 95, 100}.
C
Additional results of energy and force calibration
Conformal risk control guarantees that the average loss of our prediction sets will be bounded, as
shown in (16).
Figure 11 verifies these guarantees for the experiments presented in Section 4.3.
The subfigures correspond to different user defined loss functions: the 1 norm loss and quantile
loss, respectively. In both cases, we see that the empirical expectation of the loss—calculated over
random draws of the train, calibration, and test sets—closely tracks the tolerance α. Deviation from
the x = y reference line likely occurs due to the finite size of the calibration dataset.
Conformal risk control also includes an additional hyperparameter when compared with conformal
prediction: the upper bound B of the loss function. In the main text, this hyperparameter is set to
0.95 of the maximum loss value achieved on the calibration dataset. To show the insensitivity of our
results to this choice, Figure 12 reproduces the experiment with B set to 0.8 of the maximum loss
value achieved on the calibration dataset.
D
Additional results of elastic constant prediction
Table 1 records the accuracy of the elastic constant predictions made by our Gaussian process model.
As described in Section 4.4, we apply perturbations to the geometry of a silicon diamond structure
and the resulting properties to build finite difference approximations to elastic constant components.
We consider one case where the input to the finite difference approximation is the energy of each
perturbed system and a second case where the inputs are virial stresses. The choice of perturbations
lead us to predict the three unique components of silicon’s elastic constant tensor (C11, C12,C44) in
addition to redundancies and zero components (C21 = C12, C45 = C54 = 0). We report the error
of all size predicted values for both the energy and stress based workflows. The relative error is
reported for all components with a nonzero reference (C11, C12, C21, C44). For the zero components
(C45, C54) report absolute error in units of eV/˚A3. We note that the main purpose of work is to
evaluate an uncertainty quantification workflow and not to propose a state of the art approach to
prediction, so reasonable accuracy suffices for our purposes.
In the main text, Figure 6 reports the performance of prediction sets propagated into the space
of the three nontrivial elastic constant components (C11, C12,C44). Figure 13 reports the coverage
and volume of the conformal sets propagated into the space of all six predicted elastic constant
components. In this case, the multivariate and Bonferroni-corrected approaches do not achieve the
guaranteed coverage level for all α. We attribute this behavior to the challenges discussed in Section 5.
The univariate conformal approach still leads to systematically lower coverage than the competing
approaches. Notably, in the energy based example, even while the multivariate approach leads to
prediction sets with greater coverage than the univariate approach, it also systematically produces
sets with smaller volume. We emphasize that the volume ratio reported in Figure 13 standardized by
taking the root of the prediction dimension, so the true volume ratios reach O(1000). This extreme
difference in volume likely occurs because multivariate conformal prediction leverages covariance
27


Fisher et al
Figure 10.
Synthetic propagation study: Coverage post-propagation when the calibration data set has
uncorrelatd covariates, and the test set has highly correlated (ρ = 0.99) covariates. As in Figure 8, calibration is
performed on a 100 dimensional vector which propagated into space with dimension d ∈{5, 10, . . . , 95, 100}. (a):
performance of multivariate conformal prediction. (b): multivariate conformal prediction with propagation
correction.
Figure 11.
Energy and atomic force calibration: verification that multivariate conformal risk control achieves
guaranteed loss bounds for tolerance α. (a): loss attained by the risk control applied with loss based on the ℓ1 norm
of the score vector. (b): risk control based on the 0.9 quantile of the score vector. The x = y line is dotted in gray.
information to identify symmetries (such as C12 = C21) in our quantity of interest.
While our primary interest is the multivariate coverage of our propagated prediction sets, we can
also evaluate univariate coverage by projecting to one dimension. Figure 14 shows the univariate
coverage on the vector [C11, C12, C44] achieved by the conformal methods for both the energy and
stress based workflows. As expected, the multivariate conformal approach consistently achieves high
univariate coverage. This effect may be exacerbated because the components that the multivariate
sets are most likely to miscover (C45 = C54 = 0) are excluded from this test. The univariate method
is expected to produce univariate coverage close to 1 −α. While it achieves this guarantee in the
stress based example, in falls short in the energy based example, likely due to the approximation
limitations discussed in Section 5.
As documented in Appendix A, our workflow relies on many hyperparameters. In particular,
our exploration of the finite difference step size suggest that a range of values may work well in
practice.
For most of our results, we use a step size of 0.05 angstrom, but we also repeat our
energy based experiments using a step size of 0.01 angstroms. The accuracy is reported in Table 2,
and the coverage and volume ratios are shown in Figure 15.
The left column shows results for
all six predicted components of the elastic constant, while the right column describes only the three
nontrivial components. The coverage of multivariate conformal prediction sets is reduced in this case
compared with our other experiments and the expected guarantee. Section 5 discuss the balance of
errors which is likely responsible for this behavior.
We also repeat our energy based experiments for Si54 rather than Si16. In practice, the elastic
28


Fisher et al
Figure 12.
Energy and atomic force calibration: Replication of Figure 12 for upper bound on loss function
set to the 0.8 quantile of the calibration scores rather than the 0.95 quantile. Relationship between component-wise
coverage, full vector coverage, and set volume for univariate (gold triangles) and multivariate (purple circles)
conformal prediction as well as conformal risk control with 1-norm (turquoise stars) and quantile (green squares)
loss. Both calibration and test datasets contain systems of multiple sizes. Consequently, in the test set, vectors
containing the global energy and all atomic forces for a system take on dimensions d ∈{49, 163, 385}.
Table 1. Propagation to elastic constant uncertainty: Relative error of elastic constant predictions against
DFT reference. Note: the true value of C45 = C54 is 0, so absolute error is reported for these quantities. The 0.25,
0.5, 0.75 quantiles are taken across 100 random draws of the training and calibration sets from silicon diamond
configurations with {2, 16, 54, 128} atoms. The top sets are obtained with a finite difference approximation of the
second derivative of energy, and the bottom results are an approximation of the first derivative of virial stress.
Geometric relaxation, energy, and stress prediction were preformed with a GP model. For these results the finite
difference step sizes are set to 0.05 angstrom.
quantiles
0.25
0.5
0.75
via energy
C11
0.142154
0.32009
0.810568
C12
0.366259
2.22343
2.95303
C21
0.151435
0.395372
2.79784
C45
0.0007689
0.00196889
0.00340531
C54
0.000624246
0.00163359
0.00289075
C44
0.123629
0.315627
0.57253
via stress
C11
0.238593
0.3784
0.569042
C12
0.204968
0.39699
0.625762
C21
0.205036
0.397864
0.632561
C45
0.00134252
0.00268628
0.00459271
C54
0.000856786
0.00167998
0.00299521
C44
0.0455208
0.100135
0.19318
constant should be computed using only the smaller system, as the constant is the same for all system
sizes, and predictions for larger systems are more computationally expensive. We perform this test
to establish that our prediction set performance is similar in both cases. We report the error of our
predictions of the elastic constant in Table 3 and show the coverage and volume in Figure 16. We
see qualitatively similar behavior to our previous experiments on Si16. The multivariate conformal
method produces prediction sets with greater coverage than the univariate method. The left column
shows results for all six predicted components of the elastic constant, while the right column describes
only the three nontrivial components. For six dimensional prediction, the multivariate prediction sets
do not achieve the guaranteed coverage but manage to produce prediction sets considerably smaller
than the univariate prediction sets. For the nontrivial components, the multivariate prediction sets
achieve the coverage guarantee for almost all values of α. We attribute this difference in behavior
depending on target dimension to the difficulty of covering the zero components (C45, C54).
29


Fisher et al
Figure 13.
Propagation to elastic constant uncertainty: Results from the experiment presented in Figure 6.
Here we consider only the projection into elastic constant space preformed by the finite difference approximation
with no further projection step to isolate the non-redundant, nonzero components. As a result, the prediction sets
described in these plots are 6 dimensional, rather than 3 dimensional. Left column: elastic constant computed as a
second derivative of GP energy predictions. Right column: elastic constant computed as a first derivative of GP
stress predictions. Conformal methods: univariate (gold triangles), univariate with Bonferroni correction (red +s),
multivariate (purple xs). Top row: full vector coverage for tolerance α. Bottom row: ratio (corrected for d = 6) of
univariate sets size (gold triangles) as well as Bonferroni-corrected size (red +s) to multivariate set size.
Figure 14.
Propagation to elastic constant uncertainty: Results from the experiment presented in Figure 6.
Here, we present the coverage of each component of the final 3 dimensional prediction for the elastic constant. (a):
elastic constant computed as a second derivative of GP energy predictions. (b): elastic constant computed as a first
derivative of GP stress predictions. Conformal methods: univariate (gold triangles), univariate with Bonferroni
correction (red +s), multivariate (purple xs).
30


Fisher et al
Table 2. Propagation to elastic constant uncertainty: Replication of results shown for elastic constant
prediction via energy in Table 1 with the finite difference step sizes are set to 0.01 angstroms.
quantiles
0.25
0.5
0.75
via energy
C11
0.0554215
0.121471
0.17805
C12
0.230013
0.358458
0.531036
C21
0.178043
0.301457
0.444404
C45
0.00716034
0.016069
0.0411496
C54
0.00524922
0.0184795
0.0337626
C44
0.18665
0.257848
0.331342
Figure 15.
Propagation to elastic constant uncertainty: Replication of energy based results presented in
Figures 6 and 13 with finite difference step size set to 0.01 angstrom. These results correspond to the error reported
in Table 2. Left column: coverage and volume comparison for 3 dimensional elastic constant prediction. Right
column: results for final 6 dimensional elastic constant prediction. Top row: full vector coverage for tolerance α.
Bottom row: ratio (corrected for d = 6) of univariate sets size to multivariate set size.
Table 3. Propagation to elastic constant uncertainty: Replication of results shown for elastic constant
prediction via energy in Table 1 for a diamond silicon configuration with 54 atoms rather than 16.
quantiles
0.25
0.5
0.75
via energy
C11
0.130652
0.333228
0.633059
C12
0.10643
0.246696
0.450938
C21
0.111804
0.241559
0.418278
C45
0.000138352
0.000262387
0.000460765
C54
0.000145068
0.000277879
0.000521586
C44
0.205293
0.342873
0.460263
31


Fisher et al
Figure 16.
Propagation to elastic constant uncertainty: Replication of energy based results presented in
Figures 6 and 13 for a diamond silicon configuration with 54 atoms rather than 16. These results correspond to the
error reported in Table 3. Left column: coverage and volume comparison for 6 dimensional elastic constant
prediction. Right column: results for final 3 dimensional elastic constant prediction. Top row: full vector coverage
for tolerance α. Bottom row: ratio (corrected for d = 6) of univariate sets size to multivariate set size.
32


Fisher et al
E
Additional results of vacancy formation energy prediction
Table 4 reports the error distribution of the vacancy formation energy predictions used for our main
text results in Section 4.5.
For Figure 7 and Table 4, we trained our surrogate using 350 bulk
configurations. In Figure 17, we demonstrate that the conformal prediction methods show similar
qualitative behavior for a training set of 150 training configurations.
Table 4. Propagation to vacancy formation energy: Relative error of vacancy formation energy predictions
against DFT reference. The 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 quantiles are taken across 100 random draws of the training and
calibration sets from silicon diamond configurations with {2, 16, 54, 128} atoms. Calibration is performed in the
space of the bulk configuration and vacancy energies and propagated to their scaled difference.
quantiles
0.25
0.5
0.75
0.0369428
0.0796825
0.140459
Figure 17.
Propagation to vacancy formation energy uncertainty: Replication of results from Figure 7
where the multitask dataset is trained with only 150 configurations to inform the primary task, rather than 350. (a):
coverage of propagated conformal sets produced by univariate (gold triangles), Bonferroni-corrected univariate (red
+s), multivariate (purple xs), and projection corrected multivariate (turquoise stars) approaches at tolerance α. The
y = x line is dotted in gray. (b): Gold triangles mark the ratio between univariate and multivariate prediction
interval length. Red +s compare Bonferroni-corrected univariate to the projection corrected multivariate method. A
dotted horizontal line marks a ratio of 1. (c): the comparison in volume ratio is repeated for univariate methods
compared against the multivariate approach with propagation-corrected scores. Ribbons shade the region between
the 0.25 and 0.75 quantiles. Results are obtained from 25 randomly drawn training and calibration sets for each of
55 silicon configurations.
33
