Title: Perception, Layout, and Validation: Calibrated Confidence for Reliable Straight-Through Processing of Financial Documents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.20110v1

Published Time: Fri, 18 Sep 2026 01:28:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Perception, Layout, and Validation: Calibrated Confidence for Reliable Straight-Through Processing of Financial Documents 

Yichao Jin, Yushuo Wang, Yuxuan Han, Kwan Ching Yee Sonia, Weiyang Song, Chiu Jin-Chun Kent , Wong Chong Hwee , Wong Tiong Kiat , Kenneth Zhu Ke , Jingyuan Zhao 

{JinYichao, YushuoWang, YuxuanHan, SoniaKwan, WeiyangSong, KentChiu, ChongHweeWong, WongTK, KennethZhu, JingyuanZhao}@ocbc.com OCBC, Singapore 

Abstract 

Straight-through processing (STP) on extracted key-value fields from financial documents with-out human review requires a calibrated proba-bility together with a bounded guarantee on the residual error of the auto-approved tier. The emergence of modern Vision Language Mod-els (VLMs) provides an out-of-the-box capabil-ity for extracting the key-values, but their ver-balized confidence signals are unreliable and weakly track field correctness. This paper introduces a decomposed confi-dence layer along three interpretable channels, including perception, layout, and validation. Together with a final conformal risk control, the score can be used for reliable STP of financial documents. The method is validated on three public datasets covering real invoices, synthetic invoices, and ad-buy forms, using two differ-ent VLM families (Qwen3.6-27B and Gemini-3.1-Flash-Lite). Our decomposed score consis-tently improves the separation of correct from incorrect extractions, substantially raising the AUROC from 0.54–0.74 for VLM verbalized signals to 0.90-0.99 with contributions from all three designed channels. Crucially for indus-trial deployment, this enables usable STP. The native VLM confidence signals could clear only 0.1%-7.0% of fields under risk control at a tar-get error of ≤ 10% . In contrast, the proposed method auto-approves 49-72% of fields while holding the empirical error of the accepted tier at or below the target. 

1 Introduction 

Financial back-office operations, such as accounts payable and client onboarding, have to process large volumes of semi-structured documents (e.g., invoices and trade orders) under tight time con-straints. Currently, in most financial institutions, manual verification of the extracted fields still dom-inates the per-document cost. Therefore, Straight-through processing (STP), which auto-approves the extractions with minimal human review, becomes the key driver of productivity and scalability. In a financial setting, STP carries a stringent bar. In particular, a single wrongly auto-approved value (e.g., a transposed amount or a misread account number) is a critical financial and compliance er-ror. Safe STP thus requires two things beyond a point extraction. First, a per-field probability that is calibrated . Second, a distribution-free bound 

on the residual error of the auto-approved tier. To-gether, these hold the error rate among accepted fields below an operator-chosen budget. Modern vision-language models (VLMs) have largely solved the extraction step. Prompted with a page image and a field schema, they emit values di-rectly and usually accurately, without task-specific training. What they lack is a reliable confidence signal. A VLM can verbalize a confidence score, but these are often saturated and over-confident. On our data, verbalized confidence separates correct from incorrect extractions with an AUROC of only 

0.54 –0.74 (i.e., at times worse than chance). Token log-probabilities, where exposed, sit over generated sub-word tokens and track field correctness only weakly. Even sampling-based self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022) is blind to systematic errors, where the model returns the same wrong value on every sample. Consequently, a VLM-only STP system is caught between auto-approving almost nothing and auto-approving errors. We introduce a decomposed confidence layer for VLM key-value extraction, which scores each ex-tracted field along three interpretable channels. The 

Perception channel checks if the evidence is legi-ble from region-local image quality, VLM-OCR agreement, and value-string cues. The Layout 

channel asks if the value sits where this field nor-mally appears. We retrieve historical layouts simi-lar to the current page, and score the field’s anchor-relative position under a retrieval-conditioned spa-tial prior. A value in an unusual location would be arXiv:2609.20110v1 [cs.AI] 17 Sep 2026 flagged even when read perfectly. Lastly, the Vali-dation channel applies type, checksum, and rules, and checks cross-model agreement against a sec-ond independent VLM. A gradient-boosted model fuses the three channels into a single probability, with per-field reason codes. We wrap this score in a Learn-Then-Test conformal procedure (Angelopou-los et al., 2025), which certifies a distribution-free bound on the error rate of the auto-approved tier. Finally, when two VLMs disagree, we select the value our layer scores higher. This resolves the disagreement rather than rejecting it, raising STP throughput at the same guaranteed error. We validate the method on three public datasets. They span real invoices from DocILE (Šimsa et al., 2023), synthetic invoices from FATURA (Li-mam et al., 2023), and advertising order forms from VRDU (Wang et al., 2023), using two VLM families, Qwen3.6-27B (Qwen Team, 2026) and Gemini-3.1-Flash-Lite (DeepMind, 2026). Our main contributions include • A decomposed and interpretable confidence layer consisting of perception, layout, and validation channels. The fused conformal score reliably reflects the field correctness with a distribution-free error guarantee. Exper-iments show a substantial AUROC lift from 0.54–0.74 (VLM baseline) to 0.90–0.99. • A cross-model verification-and-selection mechanism, that resolves disagreements between two VLMs, further lifts the guaran-teed STP coverage on top of fusion of the three channels. The full layer auto-approves 49-72% of fields at a ≤ 10% target error, versus 0.1-7.0% from native signals. • Per-channel and per-feature SHAP attribu-tions that make each accept and reject deci-sion auditable, as required for model-risk and governance review in a regulated setting. 

2 Related Work 

Document key-value extraction. Early field ex-tractors coupled OCR with layout-aware encoders, such as the LayoutLM family (Xu et al., 2020, 2021; Huang et al., 2022) and OCR-free models like Donut (Kim et al., 2022). These require task-specific fine-tuning and predict grounded spans. Modern VLMs instead read a page image and emit field values directly, without training. However, the extracted values are often ungrounded without reliable boxes and confidence scores. Our proposed layer is agnostic to the extractor, scoring the confidence of already-extracted values and recovering grounding from OCR spans. 

Confidence and calibration for extraction. 

Confidence for extraction and generation has re-lied on token log-probabilities, verbalized confi-dence (Xiong et al., 2024), and sampling-based self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022). For VLM field extraction these signals are weak. The closest line fuses heterogeneous signals (i.e., log-probabilities, OCR quality, image quality, and coarse spatial fea-tures) into a single learned score and reports an aggregate AUROC (Kumar, 2026). Our work differs in three ways. First, we add a retrieval-conditioned layout prior as a first-class sig-nal, rather than coarse spatial features. Second, we keep the score interpretable through a per-channel decomposition with reason codes. Third, we tar-get a distribution-free straight-through-processing guarantee, not only a ranking metric. 

Conformal risk control and selective prediction. 

Selective classification abstains on low-confidence inputs (Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2017). Split confor-mal prediction turns any score into distribution-free coverage (Vovk et al., 2005). Learn-Then-Test (An-gelopoulos et al., 2025) and conformal risk control (Angelopoulos et al., 2024) extend this to control general risks, including the selective error of an accepted set through multiple-hypothesis testing. We use Learn-Then-Test to certify a distribution-free bound on the error rate of the auto-approved tier, class-conditional by field type. Distinctively, our retrieval score is both an input to the confi-dence model and the variable that indexes the cali-bration regime, linking template familiarity to the risk-control guarantee. 

3 Problem Statement and Methodology 

Figure 1 shows the end-to-end confidence layer. The input is a pdf document, where a VLM ex-tracts field values directly with verbalized confi-dence score. In parallel, OCR yields word spans, and a retrieval step fetches historical layouts similar to the page. Then three channels examine the cor-responding features to score each extracted value. In particular, the perception channel checks if the evidence is legible. The layout channel checks whether the value sits where the field normally ap-Figure 1: End-to-end confidence layer. The VLM extracts ungrounded field values from the page image. OCR spans recover grounding, and nearest-layout retrieval supplies similar historical templates. Three interpretable channels (i.e., perception, layout, and validation) score each extracted value. A gradient-boosted model (LightGBM) fuses them into a calibrated probability p(correct) , which a conformal selective gate turns into an auto-approval decision at a guaranteed selective risk ≤ α.

pears. The validation channel applies content rules and cross-model agreement. Subsequently, a Light-GBM model fuses the three channels into a single probability pf . Finally, a conformal selective gate turns pf into an auto-approval decision with a con-trolled error rate. We detail each component below. 

3.1 Grounding recovery 

A VLM reads a document image and a field schema, and returns a value vf and its verbalized confidence score sf for each field type f . Our layer assigns each extracted field (f, v f , s f ) a calibrated proba-bility pf that the value is correct, using the page and its recovered OCR grounding. We first recover grounding from OCR word spans, where each span is a candidate c with printed text text( c) and a bounding box. The candidate set for field f collects the spans whose canonical text matches the extracted value 

Cf = { c : canon f (text( c)) = canon f (vf ) }

where vf is the VLM value and canon f is a per-type canonicalizer which handles numeric toler-ance, ISO-8601 dates, and normalized strings. 

|Cf |=0 means the value is not on the page (a strong error signal) and |Cf |>1 means the value is am-biguous. The details of canonicalizer design are illustrated in Appendix A. 

3.2 Perception channel 

The perception channel asks whether the evidence is legible and read correctly with 11 features. From the value string we take length, token count, digit ratio, and confusable-glyph mass (e.g., 0/O , 1/l ,

5/S ). At the candidate box, we take region-local image quality (i.e., Laplacian variance, contrast, ink density, and glyph height) and the edit distance between vf and the OCR text there. We also in-clude the VLM’s verbalized confidence. 

3.3 Layout channel 

The layout channel contributes 15 features and is illustrated end to end in Figure 2. It asks whether 

vf sits where field f normally appears from docu-ments with similar layout. 

Anchor-relative geometry. We encode a candi-date’s position relative to a nearby label anchor rather than in absolute page coordinates. The anchor is chosen geometrically, not semantically. Among all OCR words on the page (excluding the value’s own tokens), we take the nearest label-like word under a fixed preference order. A word on the same text line and to the left of the value (within 

0.6hv vertically, where hv is the value height) is preferred, scored by its horizontal distance. So the closest same-row-left word wins. This cap-tures the common “ Label: value ” layout. If not found, we fall back to a word directly above and roughly column-aligned (within 3hv horizontally). This handles column-header layouts. The matching uses no keyword list or field-type dictionary, so it is robust to unseen templates. Given the anchor at center center (a) with height ha, the position feature is the offset normalized by anchor height as 

z = center( v) − center( a)

haFigure 2: Layout-channel drill-down. Offline (top): each historical document is encoded by the layout-descriptor encoder ϕ into a FAISS index, and the field positions across the corpus are pooled to fit a global Normal–Inverse– Wishart (NIW) prior. Online (per field): (1) grounding gives the anchor-relative position z of the value (offset from its label anchor, normalized by anchor height h); (2) the query page is encoded by the same descriptor ϕ and retrieves the k nearest historical layouts, each contributing its field position and a similarity weight, N = {(zi, w i)};(3) The global prior updated with the similarity-weighted neighbours N yields a Student-t posterior predictive   

> p(z| N ). The shaded blue region is where the field typically lands for this template (tight), while the dashed ellipse is the global prior it falls back to when no neighbours are found (wide). A candidate whose position lies in the blue region scores high, whereas one in the tail (Low Prob) is penalized even when read correctly.

z is invariant to translation and to scale across tem-plates and page sizes. When no anchor qualifies, z

falls back to the offset from the page centre. 

Retrieval. We encode each page as a binary token-mask descriptor (details in Appendix D) and index the historical documents with FAISS (Douze et al., 2025). To inference a new page we retrieve the k

nearest layouts with similarity weights {wi}ki=1 .We summarize familiarity by the top similarity 

smatch = max i wi and a soft effective neighbour count keff =   P  

> i

wi

2/ P 

> i

w2 

> i

.

Retrieval-conditioned spatial prior. We model z

for each field type with a Normal–Inverse–Wishart (NIW) (Murphy, 2007) prior on its mean and co-variance, fit on the global field-conditional pool. We update the prior with the retrieved neighbours’ positions, weighted by similarity, and marginalize to a Student-t posterior predictive p(z | N ). A sin-gle shrinkage hyperparameter κ0 governs how fast neighbours override the global prior. The behaviour is self-regularizing in familiarity. In particular, at 

keff =0 the posterior collapses to the global field prior (cold start); small keff yields heavy tails and appropriately low confidence; large keff concen-trates around the template-specific location. 

Non-circular scoring. A value can appear at sev-eral places on the page, so Cf may contain multiple positions zc. We score the field’s placement with the layout score sL, the log-average posterior den-sity over these occurrences as 

sL = log 1

|Cf |

X

> c∈Cf

p(zc | N ).

Averaging rather than taking the maximum avoids a selection bias. Selecting the maximum alone would make a value look correct merely because one of its occurrences happens to land in a high-density re-gion. Instead, the spread across occurrences is sur-faced separately as ambiguity signals, derived from the occurrence distribution πc ∝ p(zc | N ) and its entropy Hf . We expose three instances of sL into the feature set, including the retrieval-conditioned posterior s_l_marg , the global prior with retrieval off s_l_cold whose gap to the primary exposes the retrieval lift, and under an absolute-position prior s_l_abs as a weak baseline. 

3.4 Validation channel 

The validation channel applies content rules and contributes 8 features. It checks type and format va-lidity, ISO-4217 currency and date validity, check-sums where a field admits one (e.g. IBAN mod-DocILE FATURA VRDU Method Qwen Gemini Qwen Gemini Qwen Gemini Self-consistency 0.728 0.660 0.605 0.544 0.629 0.560 VLM baseline 0.736 0.702 0.614 0.597 0.597 0.550          

> + P/L/V fusion 0.911 0.908 0.990 0.996 0.921 0.934
> + cross-model 0.915 0.997 0.928
> Table 1: AUROC for predicting extraction correctness across four approaches, on three datasets and two VLM families. The cross-model row fuses both VLMs into one output (one value per dataset).

97, ISIN), and arithmetic residuals across amount fields (e.g., net + tax = gross). It also records cross-model agreement on whether a second, inde-pendent VLM returns the same canonical value. 

3.5 Feature fusion model 

A gradient-boosted model fuses the three channels into a single probability pf . We use LightGBM over the concatenated per-channel features, learn-ing correlated interactions. The model is tabular and yields SHAP attributions, so each accept/reject decision carries per-feature reason codes for infor-mative model-risk review. The full feature list can be found in Appendix B. 

3.6 Conformal selective gate 

A calibrated probability is not yet a decision. The gate accepts a field iff pf ≥ λ, where λ is chosen on a held-out calibration set so that the selective risk 

(error rate among accepted fields) stays at or be-low an operator-chosen budget α. Learn-Then-Test (Angelopoulos et al., 2025) makes this threshold search valid, giving a distribution-free guarantee at confidence 1−δ. As a result, the auto-approved tier carries error at or below α, and everything below the threshold is routed to human review. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental setup Datasets. We evaluate three public document col-lections spanning real invoices DocILE (Šimsa et al., 2023), synthetic invoices FATURA (Li-mam et al., 2023), and advertising order forms VRDU (Wang et al., 2023). Each contributes a subset of fields unambiguously under a shared tax-onomy (19, 14, and 9 types respectively). The offline layout index is built for each dataset from the training split and is disjoint from the evaluation documents. The details are given in Appendix C. 

VLM extractors. To test that the confidence layer is model-agnostic, we run every experiment with two independent VLM families, Qwen3.6-27B and Gemini-3.1-Flash-Lite. A value and its verbalized confidence for each field are returned from a single ungrounded prompt over the page image. We query each document Kq=5 times to estimate self-consistency and take the canonical value as the extraction. The full prompts can be found in Appendix E, and the detailed fusion model configurations can be found in Appendix F. 

Baselines. We compare against the confidence signals from the VLM alone (i) self-consistency :the fraction of the Kq = 5 samples agreeing with the modal value; and (ii) a VLM baseline : the native verbalized confidence score. We report our full end-to-end pipeline based on feature engineering from three channels and the fusion layer. 

4.2 Correctness discrimination 

Table 1 reports AUROC for predicting whether an extracted value is correct. As baselines, the VLM’s own confidence signals are weak: self-consistency and the VLM baseline reach only 0.54 –

0.74 across the six dataset–model settings. Notably, self-consistency is not stronger than the single-call VLM baseline despite costing Kq calls. This is be-cause sampling agreement detects only stochastic errors, where resampling changes the answer, but is blind to systematic ones, where the same wrong value is returned every time. In practice, many VLM extraction errors are systematic, so high agreement reflects determinism, not correctness. In contrast, adding the P/L/V channels together with the fusion layer considerably raises AUROC to 

0.91 –0.99 , which holds across all dataset and VLM settings, confirming the pipeline is largely model-agnostic. Moreover, cross-model agreement adds a further increment when both VLMs are available. The lift is largest on FATURA at 0.997 , whose clean synthetic templates make layout and OCR cues highly reliable, and is consistent on the other two real-document collections at 0.91 –0.93 .(a) DocILE (b) FATURA (c) VRDU   

> Figure 3: SHAP feature importance by channel (Qwen extractor +cross-model) on the three datasets. Labels are colored by channel (P blue, L red, V green). The channel emphasis shifts slightly with document type: FATURA is perception/OCR-driven, VRDU is layout-driven, DocILE is in between.

4.3 What the fusion model learns 

Figure 3 shows SHAP attributions for the fused model, grouped and colored by channel. Three patterns hold across all datasets. First, the re-trieval prior is the strongest signal. The effective-neighbour count n_eff has the widest impact in every panel, with a long low-value tail that correctly lowers confidence at cold start. And the retrieval-conditioned spatial scores ( s_l_marg , s_l_cold )and anchor distance ( anchor_dist ) form a consis-tent supporting cluster. Second, cross-model agree-ment ( xagree ) is a clean and high-impact valida-tor that agreement raises confidence and disagree-ment lowers it. Third, within perception the value-string and OCR cues do most of the work using to-ken count ( val_ntok ), digit ratio ( digit_ratio ), glyph height ( glyph_h ), and VLM–OCR edit dis-tance ( ocr_editdist ). While the VLM’s own ver-balized confidence ranks only mid-pack, consistent with its weakness as a standalone signal. Aggregated by channel, layout, and perception dominate ( 49% and 39% of overall attribution), with validation contributing the rest. The channel emphasis shifts with document type. FATURA is perception/OCR-driven because of its clean and synthetic templates, VRDU is layout-driven, and DocILE is in between. The top signals are stable across all datasets and VLM families. The interpretability of the layer is a deployment prerequisite in a regulated financial setting. An automated approval that cannot be explained is, in practice, often not acceptable. Model-risk manage-ment and audit functions require that every straight-through decision be traceable to a justifiable cause, where a monolithic neural confidence score is in-sufficient. Because our fusion model is tabular and its inputs are organized along the interpretable perception, layout, and validation channels, every accept/reject decision decomposes via SHAP into signed per-feature contributions that read as human-legible. A field would be routed to review because its value has little retrieval support (e.g., an unfa-miliar template), or the two VLMs disagree, or it sits an unusual distance from its label anchor, or the VLM reading diverges from the OCR text. These inspections are exactly the artifacts a model valida-tion or regulator review asks for, allowing a human reviewer to either trust or override the gate on a case-by-case basis. The confidence layer is there-fore not merely a score but an auditable control in a compliance-bound environment. 

4.4 Straight-through-processing coverage 

Table 2 shows the deployment-facing result on the percentage of fields that can be auto-approved while holding the accepted-tier error at or below a target. This is the operative metric in the real regulatory setting where straight-through process-ing is precision-first. Specifically, a wrongly auto-approved value is a financial or compliance error, whereas a correct value sent to review is only a small efficiency cost. Consequently, the question is not average accuracy but how much can be auto-approved at a guaranteed precision. Dataset Method ≤5% err ≤10% err ≤20% err DocILE Self-consistency (Qwen/Gemini) 0.1 / 0.0 0.2 / 0.0 0.5 / 0.3 VLM baseline (Qwen/Gemini) 0.3 / 0.1 1.6 / 0.1 12.2 / 0.6 + P/L/V fusion (Qwen/Gemini) 20.7 / 21.4 39.3 / 42.6 58.0 / 61.1                            

> + cross-model 28.1 49.4 66.5
> FATURA Self-consistency (Qwen/Gemini) 0.1 / 0.2 0.1 / 0.2 0.2 / 0.5 VLM baseline (Qwen/Gemini) 0.1 / 1.4 0.1 / 7.0 0.4 / 18.1 + P/L/V fusion (Qwen/Gemini) 62.4 / 66.6 66.3 / 70.5 74.8 / 79.5
> + cross-model 68.4 72.3 81.6
> VRDU Self-consistency (Qwen/Gemini) 0.2 / 0.2 0.4 / 0.3 1.4 / 0.9 VLM baseline (Qwen/Gemini) 1.5 / 0.1 2.9 / 0.1 10.4 / 0.2 + P/L/V fusion (Qwen/Gemini) 25.7 / 35.9 60.5 / 66.9 78.7 / 79.7
> + cross-model 41.3 70.8 83.8

Table 2: Straight-through-processing coverage, in terms of the percentage of fields that can be auto-approved while holding the accepted-tier error at or below the target. Native VLM signals clear almost no fields, while the channel fusion and cross-model selection unlock up to 84% when ≤ 20% error. 

In particular, at a 10% error target ( ≥ 90% preci-sion) self-consistency and the VLM baseline auto-approve 0.1–7.0% of fields. Whereas the P/L/V fusion auto-approves 39 –71% at the same target, which is a one to two orders of magnitude increase, driven collaboratively by all three channels (Sec-tion 4.3). Moreover, cross-model selection adds a premium tier ( 49 –72% , up to 84% at a 20% target), most visibly on VRDU, where resolving disagree-ments rather than rejecting them lifts coverage from 

61 –67% to 71% . The gains hold across both VLM families. Even DocILE, the real and heterogeneous invoices, reaches 49% auto-approval at ≥ 90% pre-cision from a near-zero baseline. Appendix G gives qualitative case studies to make the STP concrete. In each case a VLM re-turns a wrong value with high verbalized confi-dence ( ≥ 0.90 ), yet our pipeline scores it low and cross-model selection recovers the correct value. 

5 Conclusion 

We presented a decomposed confidence layer for straight-through processing of VLM-extracted fields from financial documents. It scores each field along three interpretable channels (perception, lay-out, and validation) with a retrieval-conditioned lay-out prior. A LightGBM model fuses the channels into a calibrated probability with per-field reason codes and a Learn-Then-Test conformal gate turns it into an auto-approval decision with a distribution-free error bound. Across three public datasets and two VLM families, the layer raises correctness-discrimination AUROC from 0.54 -0.74 for native VLM confidence to 0.90 –0.99 , and auto-approves 

49 –72% of fields at a 10% error target where native signals clear almost none. The gains hold across both VLMs showing its model-agnostic. A cross-model selection step resolves disagreements from two VLMs to further lift guaranteed throughput. The limitations are mild rather than fundamental in target banking settings. First, the layout chan-nel is weakest at cold start. For a genuinely novel template with no similar layouts in the index, the retrieval-conditioned prior collapses to the global field prior and adds little signal. However, in the real operation, the document stream is dominated by recurring templates (e.g., the same forms and counter-parties processed repeatedly). A truly new template is rare, and it degrades gracefully to other channels and, under the conformal gate, is routed to human review rather than mis-approved. Each such document then enters the index, so a new template becomes familiar after only a few oc-currences. Second, fitting the fusion model and calibrating the gate require field-level correctness labels. However, financial institutions usually have large volumes of approved historical documents, providing enough supervision. Moreover, manda-tory sample-checking of processed items (includ-ing auto-approved STP cases) yields a continual stream of audited field-level labels for periodic re-fresh. Finally, the rule validators add little marginal signal on the reported dataset, where errors are well-formed and no check-summable identifiers ap-pear. Their value should grow on documents such as trade orders containing IBAN / ISIN / BIC. 

References 

Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Rina Foygel Barber, and Stephen Bates. 2024. Theoretical foundations of con-formal prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11824 .Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Em-manuel J Candès, Michael I Jordan, and Lihua Lei. 2025. Learn then test: Calibrating predictive algo-rithms to achieve risk control. The Annals of Applied Statistics , 19(2):1641–1662. Google DeepMind. 2026. Gemini 3.1 flash-lite: Model card. Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. 2025. The faiss library. IEEE Transactions on Big Data .Yonatan Geifman and Ran El-Yaniv. 2017. Selective classification for deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30. Yupan Huang, Tengchao Lv, Lei Cui, Yutong Lu, and Furu Wei. 2022. Layoutlmv3: Pre-training for doc-ument ai with unified text and image masking. In 

Proceedings of the 30th ACM international confer-ence on multimedia , pages 4083–4091. Geewook Kim, Teakgyu Hong, Moonbin Yim, JeongYeon Nam, Jinyoung Park, Jinyeong Yim, Won-seok Hwang, Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, and Seunghyun Park. 2022. Ocr-free document under-standing transformer. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 498–517. Springer. Nitesh Kumar. 2026. Beyond logprobs: A multi-signal confidence engine for llm-based document field ex-traction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.24420 .Mahmoud Limam, Marwa Dhiaf, and Yousri Kessentini. 2023. Fatura: A multi-layout invoice image dataset for document analysis and understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11856 .Kevin P Murphy. 2007. Conjugate bayesian analysis of the gaussian distribution. def , 1(2 σ2):16. Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3.6-27B: Flagship-level cod-ing in a 27b dense model. Štˇ epán Šimsa, Milan Šulc, Michal Uˇ riˇ cáˇ r, Yash Patel, Ahmed Hamdi, Matˇ ej Kocián, Matyáš Skalick` y, Jiˇ rí Matas, Antoine Doucet, Mickaël Coustaty, and 1 others. 2023. Docile benchmark for document infor-mation localization and extraction. In International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition ,pages 147–166. Springer. Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. 2005. Algorithmic learning in a random world . Springer. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171 .Zilong Wang, Yichao Zhou, Wei Wei, Chen-Yu Lee, and Sandeep Tata. 2023. Vrdu: A benchmark for visually-rich document understanding. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Dis-covery and Data Mining , pages 5184–5193. Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. 2024. Can llms express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 23650–23678. Yang Xu, Yiheng Xu, Tengchao Lv, Lei Cui, Furu Wei, Guoxin Wang, Yijuan Lu, Dinei Florencio, Cha Zhang, Wanxiang Che, and 1 others. 2021. Lay-outlmv2: Multi-modal pre-training for visually-rich document understanding. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 2579–2591. Yiheng Xu, Minghao Li, Lei Cui, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, and Ming Zhou. 2020. Layoutlm: Pre-training of text and layout for document image understanding. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD interna-tional conference on knowledge discovery & data mining , pages 1192–1200. 

A Canonicalization Rules 

The canonicalizer canon f defines both candidate matching and the ground-truth correctness label in section 3. An extraction ˆv is correct iff it matches the gold value v⋆ under the per-category compari-son below. We fix the ruleset at version canon-v2 

and treat it as a versioned artifact. 

Field categorization. Each field type is routed to one category below by substring rules on its name, tested in this order: date -> number -> identifica-tion. All others default to string. 

Dates. We avoid full date parsing. We extract ev-ery run of digits and form the set of numeric com-ponents. A two-digit value v ≤ 99 contributes both itself and its century expansion ( 2000+ v if v < 50 ,else 1900+ v). Month abbreviations ( JAN -DEC ) con-tribute their month index. Two dates match if their component sets overlap and either one set is a sub-set of the other or they share at least two compo-nents. This order-agnostic rule is robust across the many formats in the data such as 3/4/2020 ,

06/07/99 , DEC31/01 , JUL20/02 .

Numbers. We strip percent signs and any charac-ter outside {0–9 , ., ,, -}. The decimal separator is taken to be the rightmost . or , followed by one or two digits, all other separators are removed. The remainder is parsed as a signed float. Two numbers Feature Description 

Perception Channel — 11 features 

verbalized self-report. VLM verbalized confidence sf , rescaled to [0 , 1] .

iq_lapvar pixels. Laplacian variance of the value crop (sharpness; low = blurry). 

iq_contrast pixels. Pixel contrast of the value crop. 

iq_ink pixels. Ink density (dark-pixel fraction) of the crop. 

iq_mean pixels. Mean gray level of the crop. 

glyph_h pixels. OCR text-box height in pixels (small = tiny/low-resolution print). 

ocr_editdist OCR. 1− string similarity of vf to the OCR text at the location (VLM–OCR disagreement). 

val_len string. Character length of the value string. 

val_ntok string. Whitespace-token count of the value string. 

confusion_mass string. Fraction of chars in the confusable-glyph set ( 0/O , 1/l/I , 5/S , 8/B , ./,). 

digit_ratio string. Fraction of value characters that are digits. 

Layout Channel — 15 features 

found_on_page grounding. 1 if the value is grounded on the page ( |Cf | > 0), else 0.

cf_count grounding. Number of candidate occurrences |Cf |.

key_found grounding. 1 if a label anchor sits beside the value. 

match_quality grounding. Token coverage of the value by its OCR span (strings). 1 for exact-canon id/date/number. 

s_l_marg spatial. Marginal (log-mean-exp over occurrences) spatial log-likelihood — the core score sL.

s_l_cold spatial. Cold-start spatial score: global field prior with retrieval off. 

s_l_abs spatial. Spatial score from absolute page position (weak baseline). 

anchor_dist geometry. Distance to the nearest label anchor z.

read_rank geometry. Vertical reading-order position of the value. 

s_match retrieval. Top retrieval similarity to a historical layout (template familiarity). 

sim_margin retrieval. Top-1 minus top-2 retrieval similarity. 

k_eff retrieval. Soft effective neighbour count from the retrieval weights. 

n_eff retrieval. Effective neighbours contributing to the spatial prior. 

H_f ambiguity. Entropy of the occurrence distribution πc (slot ambiguity). 

margin ambiguity. Top-two margin of πc (large = unambiguous). 

Validation Channel — 8 features 

v_type_ok rule. 1 if the value has valid type/format for the field. 

v_range_ok rule. 1 if the value lies in a plausible range. 

v_soft rule. Soft aggregate v_type_ok × v_range_ok (always defined). 

v_checksum rule. Checksum result where the field admits one (IBAN, ISIN); NaN otherwise. 

v_arith rule. Arithmetic consistency (net + tax = gross; items vs. total); NaN if inapplicable. 

v_applicable rule. 1 if any hard validator (checksum or arithmetic) applies. 

v_hard_pass rule. 1 if all applicable hard validators pass; NaN if none apply. 

xagree cross-model. 1 if a second, independent VLM returns the same canonical value, else 0.

Table 3: Feature dictionary for the fusion model, grouped by channel. Each entry leads with its sub-type (in italics). 

NaN rule features indicate the validator does not apply to that field (e.g. no check-summable identifier on an invoice). 

match under a strict absolute tolerance of half a cent, |a − b| ≤ 0.005 .

Identifiers and Strings. We strip accents (Uni-code NFKD), lowercase, and remove all non-alphanumeric characters. Two identifiers match on exact equality of this normalized form. 

B Feature Dictionary 

The fusion model consumes 34 features across the three channels. Table 3 lists all the features and the meanings. Features are computed at the best-scoring occurrence (Section 3). When the value is not grounded ( |Cf |=0 ), layout and pixel features fall back to fixed defaults and only the value-string and self-report features remain informative. 

C Dataset Statistics 

Table 4 reports the statistics for each dataset and VLM. The offline layout index is built once per dataset from its training split ( Indexed Layouts ), and is disjoint from the evaluation documents (Eval ). The reporting unit is a field extraction (one row per (document, field)). Row counts dif-fer slightly between the two VLMs on the same documents because grounding recovery depends on what each model extracted. DocILE uses its official validation split with template-familiarity buckets from train-cluster recurrence. FATURA and VRDU use 200-document evaluation samples. The three datasets are evaluated under a shared field taxonomy, with each dataset contributing the subset of field types it annotates unambiguously. Dataset Indexed Layouts Eval Doc Field Types VLM Fields Correct Grounded DocILE 5,180 500 19 Qwen3.6-27B 5,141 51.7% 85.4% Gemini-3.1-Flash-Lite 5,077 53.8% 86.8% FATURA 731 200 14 Qwen3.6-27B 1,850 60.2% 95.0% Gemini-3.1-Flash-Lite 1,767 63.9% 98.4% VRDU 417 200 9 Qwen3.6-27B 1,698 63.3% 97.9% Gemini-3.1-Flash-Lite 1,666 63.7% 98.0% 

Table 4: Dataset statistics. Indexed Layouts shows the unique number of training documents in the offline index. 

Eval Doc is the number of evaluation documents. Types is the number of distinct field types. Fields is the number of labeled field extractions. Correct is the fraction whose canonical value matches gold. Grounded is the fraction recovered on the page ( |Cf | > 0). Note that the two VLMs extract slightly different fields. 

DocILE (Šimsa et al., 2023) uses the full set of 19 single-value field types, including - identifiers (document_id, order_id, cus-tomer_id) - dates (date_issue, date_due) - monetary amounts (amount_total_gross, amount_total_net, amount_due, cur-rency_code_amount_due, amount_paid, amount_total_tax) - vendor fields (vendor_name, vendor_address, vendor_tax_id, vendor_email) - customer fields (customer_billing_name, cus-tomer_billing_address) - payment fields (payment_terms, pay-ment_reference). 

FATURA (Limam et al., 2023) contains syn-thetic invoices annotating 24 classes. We map them into 14 with an unambiguous single-value ana-logue onto the shared taxonomy, by collapsing rate-specific tax classes and duplicate invoice-number classes. Layout regions (e.g., "table", "logo") and free-text blocks (e.g., "note", "payment_details") have no clean field analogue and thus are excluded. 

VRDU (Wang et al., 2023) contains real adver-tising order forms from a different domain. So its 9 fields are mapped by role onto the shared taxonomy. In particular, the "contract number" to "document_id", the "product/estimate number" to "order_id", the "campaign flight start and end" to "date_issue" and "date_due", the "gross to-tal" to "amount_total_gross", the "TV station" to "vendor_name/address", the advertiser to "cus-tomer_billing_name", and the "agency" to "cus-tomer_other_name". 

D Layout Descriptor 

The layout descriptor ϕ encodes a page’s coarse text-occupancy geometry, independent of the text content. We overlay a G × G grid ( G=32 ) on the page in normalized coordinates and mark every cell that any OCR token box overlaps, giving a bi-nary occupancy mask; the mask is flattened to a 

G2=1024 -dimensional vector and L2-normalized. Two pages are compared by the inner product of their descriptors, which equals cosine similarity after normalization, so the FAISS inner-product in-dex returns the layouts whose text falls in the same places. One descriptor is computed per document from all its OCR words (across pages). The descriptor is deliberately coarse and content-blind. It fingerprints where fields sit on the page, not what they say. This is exactly the invariance retrieval needs. Two invoices from the same vendor template map to nearby descriptors regardless of their amounts, dates, or names, so the spatial prior for a field can borrow strength across all documents that share its layout. A cell is set whenever a token box overlaps it, with an inclusive end cell, so a text line thinner than one grid cell still marks its cell rather than being dropped by an exclusive slice. Listing 1 gives the details of the implementation. 

Listing 1: Layout descriptor ϕ is a binary G × G OCR-token occupancy mask, flattened and L2-normalized. Word boxes are in normalized page coordinates.               

> def token_mask_descriptor(words, grid=32): """Binary grid x grid OCR-token occupancy mask, L2-normalized.""" m = np.zeros((grid, grid), np.float32)
> for win words: l, t, r, b = w.bbox l = min (max (l, 0.0), 1.0) r = min (max (r, 0.0), 1.0) t = min (max (t, 0.0), 1.0) b = min (max (b, 0.0), 1.0) x0 = min (int (l * grid), grid - 1) x1 = min (int (r * grid), grid - 1) y0 = min (int (t * grid), grid - 1) y1 = min (int (b * grid), grid - 1) # cells the token overlaps m[y0:y1 + 1, x0:x1 + 1] = 1.0 # flatten to grid * grid v = m.reshape(-1) n = np.linalg.norm(v)
> if n > 0: v = v / n
> return v.astype(np.float32)

At query time, a descriptor is issued against the index to retrieve the KNN =50 most similar layouts. Their similarities become the retrieval weights that condition the spatial prior. The same encoder is used offline to build the index and online to form the query, so familiarity is measured consistently. 

E VLM Extraction Prompt 

Each document is extracted in a single user mes-sage: the page image followed by the following instruction. The model returns strict JSON with a value and verbalized confidence per present field, omitting absent ones. The same template is used for both VLMs. Only a per-family “thinking” toggle differs (Qwen has enable_thinking=false and Gemini has reasoning_effort=none ). The fields listed below are the DocILE schema. FATURA and VRDU use the same template with their own mapped fields. The amount rules are appended to resolve the common net/gross/due confusion. 

Listing 2: The VLM extraction prompt with DocILE field schema as the example.          

> Extract the following fields from this business document image. Return STRICT JSON only, no prose. For each field that is PRESENT on the page, give an object {"value": <exact text as printed>, " confidence": <integer 0-100>}. OMIT fields that are absent. Fields: - document_id: the invoice/document number - order_id: the purchase order number - date_issue: the issue/invoice date - date_due: the payment due date - amount_total_gross: grand total INCLUDING tax (equals net + tax) - amount_total_net: subtotal BEFORE tax (net of tax) - amount_total_tax: the TAX/VAT amount only ( not a total) - amount_due: amount actually payable now ( often equals gross) - amount_paid: amount already paid - currency_code_amount_due: currency symbol or ISO code - vendor_name: the seller/vendor company name - vendor_address: the full vendor postal address - vendor_tax_id: vendor tax / VAT id - vendor_email: vendor email address - customer_billing_name: the buyer/customer billing name - customer_billing_address: the full customer billing address - customer_id: the customer account id
> Hyperparameter Value objective binary log-loss boosting gbdt n_estimators 200
> learning_rate 0.08
> num_leaves 15
> reg_lambda L2 regularization 1.0
> min_child_samples 20
> random_state 0

Table 5: LightGBM fusion-model configuration. 

> - payment_terms: payment terms (e.g. NET 30) - payment_reference: payment reference / variable symbol Respond as: {"document_id": {"value": "...", " confidence": 90}, ...} Amount rules: net = subtotal before tax; tax = the tax amount only; gross = grand total including tax (gross = net + tax); due = amount payable now. If the page shows a single total, use it for BOTH gross and due. Report each amount exactly as printed.

Sampling. Each document is queried Kq=5 

times. The first sample is greedy (temperature 

0) and fixes the reported value, the remaining four are sampled (temperature 0.7) to estimate self-consistency. The reported value is the modal canonical value across samples, the verbalized con-fidence sf is the mean self-reported confidence, and the sampling-agreement fraction is the self-consistency baseline. The deployed operating point is the single greedy call. The additional samples are used only to compute the self-consistency baseline. 

F Fusion model configuration 

The fusion model is a gradient-boosted decision tree ( LightGBM.LGBMClassifier ) with the binary log-loss objective. Table 5 lists the full configu-ration. Regularization is deliberately conservative for the small tabular problem ( ∼800–2600 training rows per split), shallow trees ( 15 leaves), an L2 penalty, a minimum of 20 samples per leaf and no row or feature subsampling. The model is retrained from scratch on each document-level split. 

G Qualitative Case Studies 

We show four cases where one VLM extracts a wrong value with high verbalized confidence, but the confidence layer assigns it a low prob-ability. In every case the wrong and right val-ues have nearly indistinguishable verbalized confi-dence ( 0.90 –0.998 ), yet the fused score separates (a) Sender vs. recipient confusion ( customer_billing_name ): fused 0.145 vs. verbalized 0.953 on Gemini result.            

> (b) Print-timestamp vs. issue date ( date_issue ): fused 0.083
> vs. verbalized 0.943 on Gemini result.
> (c) Call-sign over-inclusion ( vendor_name ): fused 0.178 vs. verbalized 0.954 on Qwen result.
> (d) Person vs. company ( vendor_name ): fused 0.351 vs. ver-balized 0.803 on Qwen result.

Figure 4: Qualitative case studies. In each, one VLM is confidently wrong (verbalized ≥ 0.90 ) and the other is correct. Our fused score separates them (wrong value listed first). The confidently-wrong extraction is assigned a low fused probability in every case, while the correct value scores high. 

them cleanly. This is the qualitative counterpart of the aggregate AUROC gap. It also shows why cross-model selection works by keeping the value our layer scores higher to recover the correct an-swer in all four cases. Each case illustrates a differ-ent error mode. 

Case 1. Sender vs. recipient confusion in Fig-ure 4a on customer_billing_name field. On a payment-advice document, Gemini returns the pay-ing party "GMMB Inc" (verbalized 0.988 ) instead of the billed customer "Katz Media Group" (gold). Qwen returns the correct value ( 0.950 ). Verbalized confidence cannot tell them apart, but our layer scores Gemini’s value 0.145 and Qwen’s 0.953 : the sender’s name sits in the letterhead block, where a billing-name field rarely lands. 

Case 2. Wrong date field as shown in Figure 4b on date_issue extraction. On a broadcast confirmation, Gemini returns "08/06/2020" (verbal-ized 0.995 ), which is the footer print timestamp, not the "Date Entered" issue date "07/21/2020" (gold). The reading is crisp and unambiguous, so perception signals do not help; the layout channel penalizes the value because a footer position is far from where an issue date normally appears, scoring it 0.083 against Qwen’s 0.943 .

Case 3. Call-sign over-inclusion in Figure 4c on vendor_name . Qwen returns "Cumulus-Lake Charles KYKZ-FM" concatenating the station call sign onto the vendor name (verbalized 0.930 ), while gold is "Cumulus-Lake Charles" aligned by Gemini. Our layer scores Qwen’s over-inclusive value 0.178 and Gemini’s value 0.954 , driven by the span/OCR-coverage and value-string cues. 

Case 4. Person vs. company in Figure 4d on 

vendor_name . On a purchase requisition, Qwen returns the requisitioner person name "George Patskan" (verbalized 0.900 ) instead of the vendor company "PHILIP MORRIS U.S.A." (gold). Our layer scores Qwen’s 0.351 and Gemini’s 0.803 ,where the requisitioner name sits in an internal form field, not where a vendor name is expected.