Title: Adaptive Ad Load Design for Sponsored Search Markets: Evidence, Theory, and Deployment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.14418v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Jul 2026 01:10:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 54

Markdown Content:
# Adaptive Ad Load Design for Sponsored Search Markets: Evidence, Theory, and Deployment 

Mohammad Rashid ∗

University of Washington Hema Yoganarasimhan ∗

University of Washington July 17, 2026 

Abstract 

Ad-load design is a central supply-side decision in sponsored search: more sponsored slots can raise revenue, but may crowd out organic results and degrade user outcomes. We study this trade-off using a large-scale randomized field experiment on an Android app store, where over five million users are exposed to one through six sponsored slots. Increasing ad load raises revenue by up to 43%, but reduces total search conversions by up to 5% and daily engagement by up to 2.2%. These average effects mask substantial heterogeneity: additional slots generate large revenue gains for high-ad-conversion queries, but little or negative marginal revenue for low-conversion queries. The trade-off also shifts within query as advertiser composition changes, such as brand-advertiser presence. Motivated by these findings, we design and deploy a novel adaptive algorithm – exploration-augmented Locally Adaptive Ad Load (e-LAAL). e-LAAL combines LAAL, a model-free query-level decision rule that updates ad-load recommendations using recent outcomes, with static exploration arms that maintain support and provide fixed-policy counterfactual benchmarks. We provide a finite-time dynamic-regret guarantee for the e-LAAL architecture. In a platform-level production deployment serving 22.3 million users and 77.6 million searches, e-LAAL improves the empirical revenue–conversion trade-off relative to deployed static benchmarks and outperforms uniform and historical query-dependent static benchmarks. 

Keywords: Digital advertising, Adaptive algorithms, Sponsored search, Ad load 

> ∗

We would like to thank the participants of the PhD workshop at the University of Washington and the 2026 UW-UBC conference for their comments. We are also grateful to Simha Mummalaneni, Omid Rafieian, Ken Wilbur, Zikun Ye, and Dennis Zhang for their detailed feedback, which has significantly improved the paper. Please address all correspondence to: rashid98@uw.edu, hemay@uw.edu. arXiv:2607.14418v1 [cs.LG] 15 Jul 2026 1 Introduction 

1.1 Sponsored Search Advertising 

Search advertising is one of the central monetization channels in the digital economy. In 2025, search advertising revenue in the United States reached $114.2 billion, making it the largest format of online advertising (Interactive Advertising Bureau 2026). The success of sponsored advertising stems from a unique structural advantage: the precise alignment between user intent and advertiser offerings. Unlike display or social media advertising, which often rely on interrupting a user’s consumption of content, search ads are served at the moment a user reveals a specific need or interest through a query. This intent-driven architecture reduces the friction between the user’s objective and the advertisement, making search ads more relevant, less intrusive, and often more effective for direct-response objectives than other digital formats. This dynamic is particularly critical in mobile app marketplaces, where the sheer volume of available products creates a significant discovery bottleneck. With millions of applications available, search has become the primary navigation tool for users; Apple reports that nearly 65% of all App Store downloads are initiated directly after a search query (Apple Ads 2026). The search results page, therefore, becomes a natural advertising surface. Within this environment, the platform faces an important design problem. While the auction format determines which ads are shown and at what price, a more fundamental supply-side decision remains under the platform’s direct control: ad load design , or determining the number of sponsored slots to display. Increasing ad load expands paid inventory and can increase short-run platform revenue, but sponsored results may displace organic results that are more relevant to the user. Excessive ad exposure can therefore degrade search quality, reduce conversions, and weaken engagement (Kohavi et al. 2012; Carri ´on et al. 2023). Ad load design is therefore a strategic platform-level allocation problem that governs the balance between monetization and user experience. Yet despite the importance of this supply-side choice, there are no established paradigms for how platforms should set ad load in sponsored search settings. 

1.2 Research Agenda and Challenges 

In this paper, we examine the platform’s ad load design problem through three interrelated research questions. First, what is the causal effect of changing the number of sponsored slots on platform outcomes? We quantify the marginal impact of additional ads on advertising revenue and conversion, 1 which provides the baseline trade-off underlying ad-load decisions. Second, how do ad-load effects vary across queries and market conditions? We examine heterogeneity across queries, based on differences in baseline ad conversion potential, and within queries over time, based on shifts in advertiser composition such as brand participation. Third, given such heterogeneity, how can platforms design an ad-load policy that tailors sponsored inventory to context and adapts as market conditions change? Addressing these questions comes with three challenges. First, identifying the revenue–conversion trade-off requires exogenous user-level variation in ad load, so outcome differences can be attributed to the number of sponsored slots rather than selection or demand shocks. Second, heterogeneity analysis requires  

> 1Our empirical setting is an app-store platform (introduced in §1.3), where the natural unit of conversion is an app install. Throughout this paper, we define conversion as the number of apps installed through search, originating from both sponsored ads and organic results. We focus on total search conversions as a main outcome because app installs are the platform’s primary matching outcome and provide immediate search-level feedback on whether users find relevant apps.

1moderators that are predetermined or independently measured; otherwise, query- or market-level variables may be endogenous to the realized ad load. Third, policy design requires persistent support for multiple ad-load levels within each context over time. Without such support, the platform cannot keep updating counterfactual performance as advertiser entry and exit, budget depletion, bid changes, seasonality, and user intent shift. Thus, the policy problem is not only to learn which ad load works on average, but to build a theoretically grounded and deployable adaptive system that continues learning as the market evolves. 

1.3 Our Approach and Findings 

We study ad-load design on a large Android app-store platform in an Asian country. The platform is a major mobile distribution channel, with over 70% market share, roughly 40 million monthly users, 5 million daily active users, and nearly half a million apps. Search is a central discovery mechanism: users install about 2.5 million apps per day from search results pages, of which roughly 50,000 installs are attributed to sponsored ads. When a user submits a query, the platform runs a real-time Generalized Second-Price auction among eligible advertisers and displays sponsored results above organic results. The status quo before our intervention was a single-ad layout , in which one sponsored result appeared at the top of the page, followed by organic results. This setting is ideal for studying ad-load design because increasing sponsored slots directly expands monetizable inventory while displacing organic content. We address the paper’s research questions in five steps. First, we run a 66-day user-level randomized field experiment that exogenously varies the number of sponsored slots shown on the search results page. The experiment covers 10% of the platform’s user base and includes over 5 million users, 26 million searches, 377K sponsored-ad installs, and 15 million organic installs. Users are assigned to six persistent regimes: a control group, covering 5% of users, receives the status quo one-ad layout, while five treatment groups, 𝑇 2

through 𝑇 6, each covering 1% of users, receive fixed layouts with two through six sponsored slots. This design identifies the causal effects of moving from the status quo to increasingly aggressive ad-load regimes at a scale large enough to detect both monetization effects and user-side behavioral responses. The experiment reveals a clear aggregate trade-off. Moving from one ad to six ads increases revenue per user by 43%, but reduces total conversions per user by up to 5%. Higher ad loads also increase searches per user by up to 3%, suggesting that users exposed to heavier ad loads may need to search more to find relevant apps, while reducing daily engagement by up to 2.2% and generating a negative engagement trend among users exposed to at least four ads per search. Taken together, these results show that additional sponsored slots raise short-run monetization but degrade user-side outcomes, making ad-load design a multi-objective optimization problem rather than a simple revenue-maximization problem. Second, we use the experimental variation to show that the revenue–conversion trade-off is heterogeneous across queries and over time. To study cross-query heterogeneity, we focus on the top 10,000 queries by advertising conversion count and partition them into three equally sized segments (Low, Medium, High) based on advertising conversion rate in the control condition, where the sponsored ad always appears in the first position. Across all three segments, higher ad loads reduce conversions, but revenue effects differ sharply: in the Low segment, additional slots do not generate incremental revenue, whereas in the High segment, extra slots generate substantial incremental revenue. Thus, the value of an additional sponsored slot depends critically on query-level advertiser quality: a uniform “always show 𝑖 ads” rule misallocates inventory by 2showing too many ads on queries where ads convert poorly and too few ads where sponsored demand is valuable. We then examine time variation using brand queries, i.e., branded phrases such as “WhatsApp,” and find that periods with brand-advertiser presence are associated with higher revenue and conversions, with the largest gains under high ad loads. This within-query variation shows that the same query can appear on a different revenue–conversion frontier as advertiser composition changes. These results imply that effective ad-load design must be both query-sensitive and time-adaptive. Third, these empirical patterns motivate an adaptive ad-load allocation policy but also highlight why standard parametric contextual bandits are not a good fit for this setting. Conventional contextual bandits require a stable reward model over observed contexts, but many reward-relevant states in sponsored search are partially observed, including advertiser entry and exit, budget depletion, bid changes, app availability, brand participation, and shifts in user demand. The mapping from query, ad load, and market state to revenue and conversions is also complex and non-stationary, and ad-load decisions may affect future search behavior, so context arrivals are not fully policy-invariant. Moreover, per-search exploration schemes such as standard 

𝜖 -greedy or Thompson sampling do not preserve persistent user-level fixed-policy cohorts, which are needed to evaluate counterfactual policies such as “always show three ads” when ad load can affect subsequent usage. Fourth, we therefore design Locally Adaptive Ad Load (LAAL) and its exploration-augmented imple-mentation, e-LAAL. LAAL is a model-free, query-level, sliding-window policy. For each query–ad-load pair, it estimates recent mean revenue and total conversions, maps these estimates into a scalarized reward, and chooses the ad load with the highest estimated value. This design makes the policy both query-adaptive and time-adaptive: different queries can receive different ad loads, and the same query can receive different ad loads as recent market conditions evolve. The policy does not require a parametric reward model or full observability of latent market states; it can react to changes reflected in recent outcomes, even if the source of the change is not explicitly labeled. The deployed e-LAAL architecture adds a crucial exploration layer. Rather than randomizing exploration within a single adaptive arm, e-LAAL runs LAAL on 90% of users while keeping static arms 𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6

active on the remaining 10%. These static arms provide persistent support for every ad-load level and contemporaneous fixed-policy counterfactuals. We also provide a finite-time high-probability dynamic-regret guarantee for e-LAAL. The proof adapts non-stationary bandit arguments to our deployment architecture by accounting for the fact that exploration is assigned through persistent user-level cohorts, while realized query-level support for each ad-load arm may deviate from the platform’s designed traffic shares. As part of this design, we evaluate e-LAAL in a 22-day production deployment. The deployment serves 22.33 million users and 77.60 million searches, with the adaptive LAAL arm alone covering 20.10 million users and 69.85 million searches. LAAL recommends 3.1 ads per search on average and produces a bimodal recommendation distribution, often choosing either low ad loads when conversion losses dominate or high ad loads when revenue gains justify additional sponsored slots. Further, we see that LAAL shifts the empirical revenue–conversion frontier outward relative to the deployed static ad-load benchmarks. In the static arms, the familiar trade-off persists: moving from the control condition to the highest ad-load condition increases revenue per user by more than 40%, but reduces conversions per user by roughly 5%. LAAL preserves the monetization benefits of high ad loads while substantially mitigating their conversion losses: it delivers 3revenue essentially identical to the always-5-ads policy ( 𝑇 5), while generating about 3% more conversions and keeping conversions much closer to the low-ad-load benchmarks. The system-level e-LAAL mixture remains close to the LAAL arm, indicating that the 10% static exploration layer preserves ongoing learning and counterfactual support with limited performance cost. We further unpack the mechanism behind the frontier improvement. Consistent with the heterogeneity analysis, LAAL recommends fewer ads for low-CVR queries and more ads for high-CVR queries, without hard-coding these segments into the policy. For non-stationary brand queries, LAAL changes its recommendations within the same query: when the brand advertiser is absent, the policy shifts toward lower ad loads; when the brand advertiser is present, it shifts toward higher ad loads. Finally, we benchmark LAAL against both uniform and query-dependent static policies. Among uniform policies, the best historical rule selected from the 66-day experiment is 𝑇 3, whereas the best uniform rule during deployment is 𝑇 5, showing that even the best platform-wide static ad load changes over time. LAAL outperforms the historical uniform benchmark and weakly dominates the deployment-period uniform oracle by matching its revenue while delivering significantly higher conversions. A historical query-dependent benchmark improves over uniform static rules, confirming the value of query sensitivity, but remains below LAAL during deployment. Relative to an ex post deployment query-dependent empirical oracle, LAAL’s empirical regret is close to zero for the highest-volume queries, where recent local estimates are most precise. 

1.4 Contributions and Implications 

The paper contributes to the literature on monetization in digital platforms, ad-load effects, and adaptive policy design. First, from a substantive perspective, we provide large-scale causal evidence on the effects of ad load in sponsored search and show why the optimal ad load cannot be reduced to a single platform-wide or time-invariant query-level rule. Our 66-day experiment exposes over five million users to an unusually wide range of ad loads, from the status quo single-ad layout to a six-ad layout that covers most of the first page with sponsored results. This design allows us to quantify the revenue–consumer-experience trade-off induced by ad load, as reflected in conversions and engagement, over a scale and time horizon not previously studied in sponsored search. We further show that this trade-off is highly heterogeneous: query-level advertiser quality determines whether additional sponsored slots generate incremental revenue, while market-state shifts, such as brand-advertiser presence, can move the same query to a different revenue–conversion frontier. To our knowledge, this is the first study to provide causal evidence on sponsored-search ad-load effects over this range of ad loads while also documenting that the optimal ad load varies both across queries and over time. Second, from a methodological perspective, we provide a constructive and theoretically grounded solution to the adaptive ad-load allocation problem. LAAL is a model-free, query-level decision rule that uses sliding-window estimates of recent revenue and conversion outcomes to adapt ad load across queries and over time. e-LAAL is the deployable architecture that augments LAAL with persistent static exploration arms; these arms preserve support for each ad-load level and provide contemporaneous fixed-policy counterfactuals while the adaptive arm exploits recent evidence. In other words, e-LAAL is the practical implementation framework a platform can adopt directly: it implements LAAL in production, optimizes ad load at scale, and continues to collect the experimental data needed for ongoing learning and evaluation. We also provide a finite-time 4high-probability dynamic-regret bound for e-LAAL that explicitly accounts for the gap between designed traffic shares and realized query-level support. Empirically, in a platform-level production deployment serving over 22 million users and 77 million searches, LAAL improves the revenue–conversion frontier, delivers revenue comparable to high-ad-load static policies while preserving conversions closer to low-ad-load policies, and adapts in economically sensible ways by recommending fewer ads when advertiser quality is low and more ads when sponsored demand is valuable. Finally, from a managerial perspective, the results show that ad load decisions in sponsored search markets should neither be set platform-wide nor governed by a time-invariant query-level rule. Effective ad-load design must be both query-sensitive and time-adaptive: the query determines the baseline value of additional sponsored slots, while current market conditions determine whether that value has shifted. The 22-day e-LAAL deployment demonstrates that this principle is operationally feasible at a production scale. The approach is also practical and portable because it does not require a platform-specific parametric reward model, complete observability of advertiser states, or extensive engineering. Instead, it relies on recent local outcomes and a small set of fixed exploration cohorts, making it adaptable to sponsored search and e-commerce platforms that track query-level revenue and conversion outcomes. More broadly, the paper shows that platforms can ease the revenue–consumer-experience trade-off not only through auction design, pricing, ranking, or targeting, but also by dynamically controlling the supply of sponsored attention. 

2 Related Literature 

Our paper contributes to four complementary streams at the intersection of marketing, economics, and computer science: (i) sponsored-search market design, (ii) empirical work on advertising and ad-load trade-offs, (iii) ad-load allocation systems, and (iv) adaptive decision-making with contextual bandits. First, our paper connects to the large literature on auction design in sponsored search and its implications for platform revenue. Early work in this area examines how auction formats and allocation rules affect outcomes and revenue (Edelman et al. 2007; Varian 2007; Lahaie and Pennock 2007; Athey and Ellison 2011). Building on Myerson (1981), a central line of research has studied how to set optimal reserve prices in advertising auctions to improve platform revenues (Yuan et al. 2014; Leme et al. 2016; Ostrovsky and Schwarz 2023). This literature primarily focuses on optimizing pricing and ranking mechanisms for a given ad load. Apart from auction design, more recent work has examined how real-time bidding, behavioral targeting, and privacy regulation reshape allocation, pricing, and platform revenue in digital advertising markets (Sayedi 2018; Yao and Mela 2011; Rafieian and Yoganarasimhan 2021; Goldfarb and Tucker 2011). We complement this literature by focusing on ad load as a supply-side design choice. We empirically quantify how ad load affects platform revenues and user-side outcomes, propose an adaptive framework that the platform can use to decide how many sponsored slots to display for any given search query at a given point in time, and evaluate that choice using platform-level outcomes rather than advertising metrics alone. Our work thus extends this research by endogenizing the amount of sponsored inventory shown to users for any given query, and by characterizing how this operational lever can improve platform performance. Second, our work contributes to the literature that measures the effects of advertising on consumer behavior. Early work on TV ads finds that reducing advertising time increases audience size (Wilbur 2008; Wilbur et al. 2013). More recent work has focused on digital platforms. Goli et al. (2025a) document consumer sensitivity 5to ad load in a music streaming platform and find that heavier ad loads reduce user engagement and increase churn in the long run, with heterogeneous effects across age groups. In an e-commerce setting, Moshary (2025) compares two conditions—no ads and a default ad load—and finds that the number of transactions and commission revenue are higher in the no-ads condition, but that this increase in transactions does not offset the loss of advertising revenue. Finally, in a search engine sponsored-search setting, Sahni and Zhang (2024) find that reducing average ad load in the mainline above organic results from 1 to 0.83 reduces ad revenue but does not significantly affect clicks. In our setting, we vary ad load from one to six and find a clear revenue–conversion trade-off: higher ad loads increase ad revenue but reduce overall app installs and engagement. Beyond the main effects, we document that these effects are heterogeneous across queries and over time, implying that the revenue–conversion trade-off can shift across queries and market states. Moreover, while the earlier papers mainly document ad-load effects, we design and deploy an adaptive ad-load allocation policy that balances revenue and conversions, and present results from this platform-level deployment. Thus, our main goal is not just to show that these trade-offs exist or to quantify them; rather, we propose a methodological framework that decision-makers can use to adaptively allocate ad load in sponsored search settings. 2

Our work also relates to the literature that examines how to optimally allocate ad load in advertising markets. In sponsored search, Broder et al. (2008) study when to show no ads based on predicted click-through rates, while later supervised and whole-page optimization approaches use historical click patterns or predicted page-level click and revenue outcomes to determine how many ads to display (Wang et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2018). Relatedly, Kim et al. (2012) provide a theoretical analysis of how many sponsored slots a platform should offer under GSP when the objective is advertising revenue. These papers are important precursors, but they primarily rely on predicted user-response models based on observational data, historical logs, or analytical models. In contrast, we first run a large-scale randomized field experiment that exogenously varies ad load from one to six ads, allowing us to causally quantify the revenue–conversion trade-off and show that it varies across queries and over time. We then use these findings to design and deploy a model-free adaptive policy with persistent static exploration arms, contemporaneous fixed-policy counterfactuals, and a finite-time dynamic-regret guarantee. More recent work treats ad load as a platform-level decision, incorporating user-engagement proxies through multi-objective rewards, constrained optimization, off-policy learning, or doubly robust estimation. In feed allocation and social-media ad supply, related work optimizes ad exposure within an ongoing stream of organic content, using signals such as feed position, session context, user ad tolerance, ad fatigue, and long-run engagement (Liao et al. 2021; Sagtani et al. 2023; Yan et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2024). In audio streaming, Goli et al. (2025b) studies ad load as a personalized exposure problem, using long-run experiments to balance advertising revenue, subscription revenue, and user consumption. These studies establish ad load as an important operational lever, but their settings differ from sponsored search in both the decision unit and the main source of heterogeneity. In feeds and streaming, the platform manages ad exposure over a consumption path, and heterogeneity is primarily user- or session-level. In sponsored search, by contrast, the query is the central state variable: it reveals user intent, determines which organic results are displaced, and shapes the set  

> 2Indeed, we show that these trade-offs can be brittle and change over time, and that choosing a fixed ad load based on a historical experiment can lead to suboptimal outcomes; see §8.1.

6and quality of eligible advertisers. Search platforms also observe immediate search-level outcomes, such as conversions and revenue, that can be linked directly to the ad-load decision. Thus, ad-load methods designed for feed or streaming environments do not directly translate to sponsored search, where the key problem is to adapt the number of sponsored slots across queries and over time as advertiser composition changes. Finally, our paper relates to and contributes to the literature on contextual bandits and adaptive experi-mentation (Lattimore and Szepesv ´ari 2020). In a standard contextual-bandit problem, the decision-maker observes a context, chooses an action, and observes only the reward associated with the chosen action. A large theoretical literature studies algorithms such as LinUCB and Thompson sampling, typically under stable reward mappings and parametric or linear structures in the relationships among contexts, actions, and rewards (Li et al. 2010; Chu et al. 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori et al. 2011; Agrawal and Goyal 2013). Related work extends bandit methods to non-stationary environments using sliding windows, discounting, or variation-budget regret criteria (Garivier and Moulines 2011; Cheung et al. 2019; Russac et al. 2019). Closer in application, Ye et al. (2023) develop and field-test a deployable contextual-bandit policy for new-ad cold start that leverages an incumbent CTR/CVR prediction and auction system. Our setting differs in how exploration must be engineered for deployment. We maintain parallel static ad-load arms because they provide persistent, contemporaneous counterfactuals for fixed policies of the form “always show 𝑖 ads.” This design introduces a complication absent from canonical bandit models: because ad load can affect users’ subsequent search behavior, the realized query-level support in each arm need not match the platform’s designed traffic weights. We therefore provide regret bounds for the parallel-static-cohort exploration scheme, explicitly allowing realized support to deviate from intended allocation shares. We also evaluate the approach in a real production deployment, connecting the theoretical exploration design to platform-scale implementation. 

3 Setting and Field Experiment 

3.1 Setting: Android App Store 

Our data come from a leading Android app store in an Asian country that commands over 70% of the market share. On the demand side, the app store attracts around 40 million monthly users and 5 million daily active users, while on the supply side, it features nearly half a million applications developed by over eighty thousand developers. The platform’s primary source of income is advertising within the store, with the most prominent form being sponsored search ads , which is the focus of this study. On average, users install about 2.5 million apps daily from search results pages, with about 50,000 of those installs attributed to sponsored ads. When a user submits a search query in the app store, the platform runs a real-time Generalized Second-Price (GSP) auction (Edelman et al. 2007) among eligible ads, employing a cost-per-install payment model. Under the platform’s standard setting – referred to as the single-ad layout – one ad slot is allocated to the highest-ranked bidder. This sponsored ad is displayed at the top of the search results page, followed by a rank-ordered list of organic results. Users can scroll down to view additional organic listings. An example of the single-ad layout is illustrated in Figure 1a. On a typical smartphone with a 6.3–6.5 inch display (e.g., a Pixel 9), users can see eight listings (ads or organic) without scrolling if the search query is non-brand. A brand query is a search query explicitly referring to a particular application or brand. An example of a brand query is WhatsApp , while an example of a non-brand query is Flights . In the case of a 7brand query, the brand result is displayed with additional details (e.g., application screenshots), occupying two additional rows and thus reducing the number of visible items to approximately six (see Web Appendix §A for examples of brand query layouts). 

3.2 Field Experiment on Number of Ad Slots 

Our analysis leverages data from a large-scale randomized field experiment conducted on the platform’s search results page. The experiment aims to examine how varying the number of sponsored ads displayed impacts user-, advertiser-, and platform-level outcomes. The experiment ran for 66 days starting from September 2023. The experiment consisted of approximately 10% of the platform’s user-base. Users in the experiment were randomly assigned to one of six conditions, as follows: 

• Control Group ( 𝐶 ): Users in the control group experience the single-ad layout , displaying one sponsored ad per search query. This group comprises 5% of the user base. 

• Treatment Groups ( 𝑇 𝑖 ): We have five distinct treatment groups, 𝑇 2, 𝑇 3, 𝑇 4, 𝑇 5, 𝑇 6. Users assigned to treatment group 𝑇 𝑖 are exposed to an i-ad layout , where the top 𝑖 slots are assigned to ads for each search (based on the same GSP auction mechanism). An illustrative example of the three-ad layout, corresponding to users in the 𝑇 3 treatment group, is shown in Figure 1b. Each treatment group comprised approximately 1% of the platform’s user base. Users are assigned to experimental conditions by hashing each device’s unique Android identifier with a deterministic, salt - aware function to prevent collisions with other experiments. This method yields a random but reproducible treatment assignment. Throughout the experiment, user assignment to the experiment condition remains fixed, ensuring consistent exposure to the treatments/control. 3

(a) Single-Ad Layout (b) Three-Ad Layout 

Figure 1: Comparison of single-ad versus three-ad sponsored search layouts. 

> 3Although each treatment condition targets a specific number of sponsored ad positions, the actual number of ads shown per search is contingent upon the availability of eligible bidders, meaning fewer ads could be displayed if bidder supply is insufficient (i.e., realized ad load could be lower than treatment condition). However, such discrepancies are rare across all treatments in our data because the ad market is sufficiently thick.

8Overall, the experiment contains observations from 5,057,952 unique users who performed 26,326,936 searches, installed 377,425 ads, and 15,514,923 organic apps, over the 66-day experiment period. 

3.3 Data 

Our data are at the impression-level. An impression is any search result displayed to a user in response to their query. Thus, each organic link or ad shown on the first page counts as a separate impression, and if the user scrolls to subsequent pages, every additional result shown is likewise recorded as its own impression. For each impression in the data, we observe the following variables: 

• Search ID ( 𝑠 ): The unique identifier of a search. 

• Query ( 𝑞 ): The search term used by a user. We denote the query associated with Search ID 𝑠 by 𝑞 𝑠 . Our dataset contains 4,045,348 unique queries, with the top 2,000 accounting for 60% of all searches. This concentration is consistent with prior work on search platforms, where a small share of keywords generates most searches (e.g., Yoganarasimhan (2020)). Web Appendix §B.1 reports the full cumulative distribution of query search counts. Most queries belong to the Social Media, Games, and Tools categories. 

• Device ID ( 𝑢 ): The unique identifier of the user, associated with the Android device. We denote the user associated with search ID 𝑠 by 𝑢 𝑠 .

• Experiment Condition ( 𝑒 ): The experiment condition assigned to a user, drawn from the set 

E = {𝐶, 𝑇 2, 𝑇 3, 𝑇 4, 𝑇 5, 𝑇 6}. We denote the experimental condition associated with search 𝑠 by 𝑒 𝑠 = 𝑒 (𝑢 𝑠 ).

• Timestamp ( 𝑡 ): Exact time when the result is shown to the user. We denote the time of a search request 𝑠 

by 𝑡 𝑠 .4

• App ID: The unique identifier of the apps shown on the platform. We observe 141,716 distinct apps in our data. The top 20% of ads receive 90% of ad impressions, while the top 20% of apps receive 99% of total impressions of the search page. This reflects how relevance-based organic ranking algorithms amplify popular items more strongly than auction-driven ad allocations do. The cumulative distribution of app impressions is shown in Web Appendix §B.2. 

• Position ( 𝑝 ): Rank position of the app in search results. 

• Is Sponsored: A binary flag indicating whether the impression/app appears as an ad. We have ad impressions for 664 unique advertisers; the most frequent categories among sponsored apps are Finance, Shopping, and Entertainment. 

• Conversion Indicator ( Conv 𝑠, 𝑝 ): A binary indicator, defined at impression level, showing whether the user installed the app in position 𝑝 for search ID 𝑠 .We denote the sum of conversion outcomes (sum over all positions) of search ID 𝑠 by Conversion 𝑠 :Conversion 𝑠 =∑︁ 

> 𝑝

Conv 𝑠, 𝑝 (1) Please see Web Appendix §B.2 for the cumulative distribution of app conversions. 

• Revenue ( Rev 𝑠, 𝑝 ): Revenue from the advertiser upon sponsored app installation, in position 𝑝 for search  

> 4Following a search, all the results displayed on the first page of the results (both ads and organic listings) share the same timestamp
> 𝑡 𝑠 . If the user navigates to the next page in a few minutes, the time at which s/he sees the second page of results is denoted as the timestamp for the impressions/listings in the second page, and so on.

9ID 𝑠 . By definition, organic listings generate zero revenue; for ads, revenue is determined by the GSP mechanism discussed earlier. To preserve the platform’s privacy, we multiply all revenue numbers by an undisclosed multiplier. We denote the sum of revenue for search ID 𝑠 by Revenue 𝑠 ,Revenue 𝑠 =∑︁ 

> 𝑝

Rev 𝑠, 𝑝 (2) 

4 Effect of Number of Ad Slots on Conversion and Revenue 

We first describe the main effect of the number of ad slots on various outcomes in §4.1 and then quantify the heterogeneity in treatment effects across queries and time in §4.2. 

4.1 Main Effects 

Table 1 reports summary statistics of the various outcomes by experimental condition. The top panel shows the realized ad load and the number of users in each condition. We see that the realized ad exposure closely tracks the intended design (top row). Next, we focus on the two main outcomes of interest, shown in the middle panel of Table 1. Revenue per User is total advertising revenue from all the users in the experiment bucket divided by User Count in that bucket. Conversion per User is the total number of conversions from ads and organic listing divided by User Count . We see that Revenue per User increases monotonically with ad load: from 35.72 under 𝐶 to 51.18 under 𝑇 6 – a 43% improvement relative to control. In contrast, Conversions per User declines monotonically from 3.19 ( 𝐶 ) to 3.03 ( 𝑇 6), a 5% reduction. Table 1: Summary Statistics of the Experiment                                           

> 𝐶 𝑇 2𝑇 3𝑇 4𝑇 5𝑇 6
> Avg. Ad Load 1.00 2.00 3.00 3.99 4.94 5.88 User Count 2,528,428 505,193 505,016 506,335 506,713 506,267 Revenue/User a35.72 41.61 44.54 46.39 49.47 51.18 Conversion/User 3.19 3.15 3.13 3.10 3.06 3.03 Daily Eng. (%) 4.95 4.92 4.89 4.87 4.85 4.84 Searches/User 5.14 5.16 5.30 5.31 5.28 5.31
> Note: aScaled by an undisclosed multiplier.

To assess statistical significance, we estimate separate user-level regressions for outcomes 

𝑌 ∈ { Revenue, Conversion }:

𝑌 𝑢 = 𝛼 𝑌 𝐶 +

> 6

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =2

𝛼 𝑌 𝑇 𝑖 1{𝑒 (𝑢 ) = 𝑇 𝑖 } + 𝜀 𝑌 𝑢 , (3) where: 

• 𝑌 𝑢 is the outcome of user 𝑢 such that 𝑌 𝑢 = Í𝑠 :𝑢 𝑠 =𝑢 𝑌 𝑠 

• 𝛼 𝑌 𝐶 = E[𝑌 𝑢 | 𝑒 (𝑢 ) = 𝐶 ] is the control mean for outcome 𝑌 

10 • For treatment conditions 𝑇 𝑖 , 𝛼 𝑌 𝑇 𝑖 measures the deviation from control as follows: 

𝛼 𝑌 𝑇 𝑖 = E[𝑌 𝑢 | 𝑒 (𝑢 ) = 𝑇 𝑖 ] − E[𝑌 𝑢 | 𝑒 (𝑢 ) = 𝐶 ] = ATE 𝑌 (𝑇 𝑖 ). (4) We present the estimation results from Equation (3) in Table 2. It confirms the previously observed pattern: for revenue, treatment effects are positive, increasing in ad load, and highly significant; for conversion, effects are negative, more pronounced at higher ad loads, and likewise highly significant. These findings suggest an important trade-off for the platform: more ad slots raise revenue while reducing total conversions. We now examine how ad load changes consumers’ behavior and whether consumers in our setting are averse to advertising. To answer these questions, we consider two platform usage metrics, shown in the last two rows of Table 1. For each day and experimental condition, we calculate the proportion of assigned users who performed at least one search. Daily Engagement , defined as the mean of these daily proportions over the duration of the experiment, declines from 4.95% in 𝐶 to 4.84% in 𝑇 6 (a 2.2% relative decrease), with significant differences versus control across all treatment conditions. Within high-ad-load groups ( 𝑇 4–𝑇 6), we also detect a modest but significant downward trend over time (See Web Appendix §C.1 for a detailed analysis). This result shows that ad load harms platform usage, and consumers with higher ad loads are less willing to use the search feature. This finding is similar to that of Goli et al. (2025a), who report a near-linear decline in total hours spent on an audio streaming platform as ad load increases. At the same time, Searches per User rises from 5.14 ( 𝐶 ) to 5.31 ( 𝑇 6), a 3.3% increase despite the fact that the unique number of active users decreases with higher ad load. This is likely because high ad exposure degrades the quality of search results; users cannot find the desired app at the top, prompting additional searches. A similar pattern of higher search volume with a degraded search experience has also been observed in Bing search experiments (Kohavi et al. 2012). We present a detailed analysis of this effect of ad load on search behavior (including regressions) in Web Appendix §C.2. Table 2: Effect of Ad Load on Revenue and Conversion 

Revenue Conversion 

𝐶 35.722 ∗∗∗ (0.255) 3.192 ∗∗∗ (0.005) 

𝑇 2 5.890 ∗∗∗ (0.626) -0.046 ∗∗∗ (0.013) 

𝑇 3 8.818 ∗∗∗ (0.593) -0.063 ∗∗∗ (0.015) 

𝑇 4 10.669 ∗∗∗ (0.507) -0.096 ∗∗∗ (0.016) 

𝑇 5 13.746 ∗∗∗ (0.524) -0.133 ∗∗∗ (0.013) 

𝑇 6 15.455 ∗∗∗ (0.545) -0.165 ∗∗∗ (0.013) Obs. 5,057,952 5,057,952 

𝑅 2 <0.001 <0.001          

> Note: The 𝐶 row reports the mean outcome in the control condition. Rows 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6report differences relative to 𝐶 . Standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001.

In sum, increasing the number of ad slots produces a monotonic increase in revenue and a monotonic decrease in total conversions, which frames a tradeoff in the platform’s design problem. Meanwhile, ad load hurts consumers’ experience and platform usage. In the remainder of the paper, we focus on conversion as the main metric for consumer satisfaction for two reasons. First, app installations are the platform’s 11 primary matching outcome: conversions directly capture whether users find and adopt relevant apps. Second, conversions are observed at the search level and therefore provide immediate feedback that can be directly linked to search-level decisions. 

4.2 Heterogeneity in the Revenue–Conversion Trade-off 

So far, we have shown that more ad slots generally increase revenue and decrease conversions. We now examine how the revenue-conversion trade-off varies across queries and over time. 

4.2.1 Heterogeneity Across Queries 

We now examine how treatment effects vary across queries. We first segment queries into three buckets based on the quality of their ads. We select the top 10,000 queries based on advertising conversion count and rank them by their control group ad conversion rate. Formally, for query 𝑞 we define ads’ conversion rate based on their performance in the control condition as follows: AdsCVR 𝑞 = E[Conv 𝑠, 1 | 𝑒 𝑠 = 𝐶, 𝑞 𝑠 = 𝑞 ],

where Conv 𝑠, 1 is the conversion indicator of the (single) sponsored position in the control group. We only use the control condition for labeling ads because it keeps the position of the ad fixed to the first position. We then partition queries based on AdsCVR into three equal-sized segments as follows: 𝐾 1 = lowest 3,333 ,

𝐾 2 = middle 3,334 , and 𝐾 3 = highest 3,333 . 𝐾 1 consists of the set of queries with the lowest advertising conversion rate under the control condition, while 𝐾 3 consists of the highest ad conversion rate queries. We use three segments to balance interpretability and statistical precision: each segment has sufficient search volume for precise estimation while still capturing meaningful variation in ad load effects. See Web Appendix 

§D for the summary statistics of these three segments of queries. To estimate how ad load affects outcomes within each segment, we run the following query–fixed-effects regression for 𝑌 ∈ { Revenue , Conversion }:

𝑌 𝑠 = 𝛼 𝑌 𝑞 𝑠 +

> 3

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =16

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =2

𝛽 𝑌 𝑘,𝑖 1{𝑞 𝑠 ∈ 𝐾 𝑘 } 1{𝑒 𝑠 = 𝑇 𝑖 } + 𝜀 𝑌 𝑠 (5) 

𝑌 𝑠 is the observed outcome for search 𝑠 . The query fixed effect 𝛼 𝑌 𝑞 𝑠 absorbs all baseline differences across queries. Thus, 𝛽 𝑌 𝑘,𝑖 isolates the incremental effect of treatment 𝑇 𝑖 relative to control within segment 𝑘 .We report the estimation results from Equation (5) for all three segments of queries in Table A5 in Web Appendix §D. To aid interpretation, we plot the estimated effects in Figure 2 after normalizing each segment’s treatment effects by its own control mean (so a value of 1.10 corresponds to a 10% increase relative to the segment’s control mean). 5 We observe two patterns. First, we find that conversion decreases significantly as ad load increases in all three segments. Further, the magnitude and slope of this decline are broadly similar across all three segments. However, revenue displays strong heterogeneity across segments. In the low segment ( 𝐾 1), additional ad slots do not raise revenue (on average), and in fact lead to significantly negative   

> 5Points in Figure 2 show the treatment-effect estimates from Equation (5) . Confidence intervals are reported separately for each treatment effect. Although confidence intervals overlap across some ad-load conditions, pairwise tests confirm that revenue effects increase significantly with ad load in the High-CVR segment.

12 effects for 𝑇 3 and 𝑇 4. In the medium segment ( 𝐾 2), revenue becomes positive and significant at higher ad loads. In the high segment ( 𝐾 3), revenue rises sharply and monotonically with the number of ads. These patterns reveal a sharp asymmetry in how the top advertiser’s conversion rate mediates the effect of additional ad slots. For queries with low advertiser quality, additional ads fail to generate incremental paid installs. For such queries, more ads displace relevant organic results, depressing both revenue and conversion. 6 In contrast, for queries with high-quality advertisers (who have high conversion rates), increasing ad load unlocks substantial revenue gains, albeit with expected conversion losses. This contrast implies an important takeaway for platform design. A “one-size-fits-all” ad load policy is inefficient: showing many ads universally can backfire for queries with low-quality ads. As such, platforms should adopt query-sensitive allocation rules that limit exposure when advertiser quality is poor and expand ad supply when strong advertisers are present. Such query-specific or adaptive ad load allocation can improve monetization efficiency while reducing user-side friction caused by irrelevant ad clutter. 

(a) Normalized Conversion (Control=1) (b) Normalized Revenue (Control=1) 

Figure 2: Treatment effects by Ad CVR segment. 

4.2.2 Heterogeneity Over Time 

We now examine how the revenue-conversion trade-off varies over time using the presence or absence of brand advertising as a salient time-varying market-state. In this analysis, we focus on brand queries – queries which refer to a specific brand/app, e.g., WhatsApp. We first split the 8,561 brand queries in our data into two groups: 

• Brand-Active Queries , where the brand app advertises on at least one day during the experiment (709 queries). 

• Brand-Inactive Queries , where the brand app never advertises (7,852 queries). Figure 3 compares the revenue–conversion frontier across these two groups using the same axis scaling in both panels. Brand-Active Queries exhibit larger revenue gains and smaller conversion losses relative to 

Brand-Inactive Queries , resulting in a noticeably steeper frontier. 

> 6One reason revenue can decline rather than merely remain flat is that additional sponsored slots may dilute attention to the top sponsored result: when low-quality ads occupy more of the visible page, users appear less likely to convert on the first sponsored listing, and the additional lower-ranked ads do not generate enough paid installs to offset this loss.

13 However, query-specific differences could still confound the comparison above, i.e., Brand-Active Queries 

can be systematically different from Brand-Inactive Queries . We therefore focus on the 709 Brand-Active Queries and compare search-level outcomes when the brand ad is present ( Brand-On ) vs. absent ( Brand-Off ). Let 𝐵 𝑠 ∈ { 0, 1} indicate whether the brand ad at search ID 𝑠 is shown. Figure 4 shows the distribution of the share of Brand-On searches by query among the Brand-Active set. We see significant within-query variation in the presence/absence of brand-ads for almost all queries. We use this variation to measure how outcomes differ between Brand-On and Brand-Off states under each ad load condition. Specifically, we run the following regressions for 𝑌 ∈ { Revenue , Conversion } controlling for query-condition fixed effect: 

𝑌 𝑠 = 𝛼 𝑌 𝑞 𝑠 , 𝑒 𝑠 + 𝜃 𝑌 𝑒 𝑠 1{𝐵 𝑠 = 1} + 𝜀 𝑌 𝑠 (6) where 𝛼 𝑌 𝑞 𝑠 , 𝑒 𝑠 denote query-condition fixed effects. Thus, 𝜃 𝑌 𝑒 𝑠 measures the within-query change in 𝑌 when the brand ad is displayed under condition 𝑒 𝑠 . Table 3 reports ˆ𝜃 𝑌 𝑒 estimates from this analysis. We see that Brand-On searches have higher revenue and conversion than Brand-Off searches across all ad-load conditions, and the revenue gap is larger at higher ad loads. In other words, brand-advertiser presence is associated with a more favorable revenue–conversion frontier, particularly under higher ad loads. 7 Figure 5 visualizes the revenue and conversion gaps associated with brand presence. Revenue rises sharply under Brand-On while conversion declines only slightly, illustrating that brand activity meaningfully softens the tradeoff. This finding parallels the cross-query heterogeneity documented in §4.2.1: brand participation raises the quality of the sponsored slate for a query, effectively moving the query toward the high-advertiser-quality regime in which additional sponsored slots are more valuable.  

> (a) Brand-Active Queries (709 Queries) (b) Brand-Inactive Queries (7,852 Queries)

Figure 3: Revenue-Conversion tradeoff based on brand activity. Each point corresponds to an experimental condition. The Conversion axis measures total search conversions, i.e., app installs originating from both sponsored ads and organic results; the Revenue axis measures total ad revenue. Taken together, these results show that brand activity systematically affects the revenue–conversion frontier, even within the same query. When the brand advertises, the marginal cost of showing additional ads is 

> 7Previous studies have attributed these improvements to the brand ad cannibalizing the organic brand result (Simonov et al. 2017)

14 Figure 4: Distribution of Brand-On searches within Brand-Active Queries 

Table 3: Brand effect by condition with Query ×Condition fixed-effects 

Revenue Conversion 

C 93.05 ∗∗∗ (4.75) 0.104 ∗∗∗ (0.015) T2 116.36 ∗∗∗ (8.11) 0.100 ∗∗∗ (0.018) T3 128.70 ∗∗∗ (9.73) 0.111 ∗∗∗ (0.017) T4 132.31 ∗∗∗ (8.82) 0.115 ∗∗∗ (0.013) T5 139.49 ∗∗∗ (9.17) 0.127 ∗∗∗ (0.014) T6 140.03 ∗∗∗ (7.95) 0.121 ∗∗∗ (0.013) Query-Condition FE ✓ ✓

Obs. 2,253,506 2,253,506 

𝑅 2 0.103 0.016           

> Notes: Each column reports ˆ 𝜃 𝑒 from specification 6. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the query level. ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001,
> ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗𝑝 < 0.05.

(a) Conversion per search: Brand Off vs. Brand On . (b) Revenue per search: Brand Off vs. Brand On .

Figure 5: The effect of brand advertising on left: conversion and right: revenue. The gaps equal to the brand effect estimates from Table 3. 15 substantially lower: revenue gains grow while conversion losses shrink. For platforms, this highlights the importance of incorporating time-varying market conditions into ad-load decisions. A static, time-invariant allocation rule will systematically misallocate ad load (e.g., showing too few ads when brands are actively advertising and too many when they are not). Effective ad-load design, therefore, requires adaptive mechanisms that respond directly to shifts in advertiser presence and market composition. 

Summary and implications for policy design. The heterogeneity results show that the revenue–conversion frontier is neither uniform across queries nor stable over time. Across query segments, the marginal conversion loss of adding sponsored slots is broadly similar, but the marginal revenue effect varies sharply with advertiser quality. We find that additional slots generate little incremental sponsored installs—and can even reduce revenue—for queries with low ad-conversion rates, whereas they deliver substantial incremental revenue for queries with high ad-conversion rates. Furthermore, within a given query, the frontier shifts with market composition: Brand-On states are associated with higher revenue and total conversions than Brand-Off states, and these differences are largest at higher ad loads. In our reduced-form analysis above, we operationalized non-stationarity along one salient dimension—the presence or absence of the brand advertiser on a given query—because it is observable and generates substantial within-query variation. However, non-stationarity can arise from many other forces, e.g., entry/exit of other advertisers, budget exhaustion, shifts in bids and predicted relevance, seasonality, or changes in user intent. So a policy that conditions only on brand presence would be incomplete; instead, the platform needs a general adaptive rule that updates from recent outcomes rather than hard-coding a single market-state indicator. Taken together, these patterns imply that any static 

ad-load rule—platform-wide or fixed per query—will systematically misallocate inventory, showing too many ads when advertiser quality is low and too few when high-quality or brand demand is present. This motivates an adaptive , query-level policy that updates ad load using recent outcomes to track changes in advertiser quality and advertiser participation. 

5 Problem Setup 

5.1 Background 

We now model ad load design as a sequential decision problem. For each incoming search request, the platform observes a context and chooses how many sponsored slots to display, then observes noisy outcomes. A useful policy should (i) customize ad load across queries, (ii) adapt to non-stationarity, and (iii) make the revenue–conversion trade-off explicit. The setup below defines the context, actions, and outcomes; introduces a scalar reward representing the platform’s objective; and provides a deployable adaptive policy. 

Context, actions, outcomes. Consider a sequence of search requests indexed by 𝑠 = 1, 2, . . . . Each request arrives with an observable context 𝑥 𝑠 = (𝑡 𝑠 , 𝑞 𝑠 ) ∈ X , where 𝑡 𝑠 is the time and 𝑞 𝑠 is the query. 8 Given 𝑥 𝑠 , the platform chooses an action 𝑎 𝑠 ∈ A = {1, 2, . . . , 6}, where 𝑎 𝑠 is the number of sponsored slots displayed above organic results. Conditional on 𝑎 𝑠 , the platform runs a GSP auction and shows the top 𝑎 𝑠 sponsored listings. 

> 8The context can be expanded to include user/device attributes or advertiser-set features. We restrict attention to non-personalized ad-load rules for two reasons: (i) the platform avoids user-level ad-load personalization due to privacy and fairness concerns; and (ii) the main sources of heterogeneity in our setting (as documented above) operate at the query and time levels.

16 After the search results are shown, the platform observes a vector outcome 𝑦 𝑠 =  Conversion 𝑠 , Revenue 𝑠 

 ∈Y ⊆ R2

> +

, where Conversion 𝑠 is the total number of installs from the search (sum of sponsored and organic installs) and Revenue 𝑠 is ad revenue generated by the search. 9

History, policies, and objective. Let the information available at (calendar) time 𝑡 be the history of past contexts, actions, and outcomes defined as 𝐻 𝑡 = {( 𝑥 𝑠 ′ , 𝑎 𝑠 ′ , 𝑦 𝑠 ′ ) : 𝑡 𝑠 ′ < 𝑡 } ∈ H .A policy maps the current context and available history to an action: 

Definition 1 (Policy) . A policy 𝜋 is a mapping 𝜋 : H × X → Δ(A) , where Δ(A) is the probability simplex over A. Under 𝜋 , the action for search 𝑠 is drawn as 𝑎 𝑠 ∼ 𝜋 (𝐻 𝑡 𝑠 , 𝑥 𝑠 ).

Because ad load can affect user behavior (e.g., the number of subsequent searches), the realized sequence of contexts {𝑥 𝑠 } need not be policy-invariant. Next, to make the revenue–conversion trade-off explicit, we use a scalarized reward: 

Definition 2 (Reward Function) . For 𝜆 ≥ 0, define 

𝑟 (𝑦 𝑠 , 𝜆 ) = 𝜆 Revenue 𝑠 + Conversion 𝑠 . (7) The scalarization parameter 𝜆 governs the relative weight on revenue versus conversions. Scalarization is standard in multi-objective optimization (Deb et al. 2016), and varying 𝜆 traces out a Pareto frontier. Recent marketing studies also use this approach (Rafieian et al. 2025; Wang et al. 2024; Cheng et al. 2025). In practice, firms calibrate 𝜆 using the estimated monetary value of an incremental conversion, such as expected downstream retention, future purchases, or user lifetime value. This maps both terms in 𝑟 (𝑦 𝑠 , 𝜆 ) to a common value scale, so policy comparisons reflect a transparent economic trade-off. Firms may also tune 𝜆 to satisfy business constraints, for example, meeting a minimum revenue target while limiting conversion losses. We discuss the choice of 𝜆 in our setting in §6.5. 

5.2 Problem Definition 

Given 𝜆 , the firm’s objective is to maximize cumulative expected reward over a fixed time horizon 𝑇 :

𝜋 ★ ∈ arg max  

> 𝜋

E

"∑︁  

> 𝑠 :𝑡 𝑠 ≤𝑇

𝑟  𝑦 𝜋 𝑠 , 𝜆 #

, (8) where the expectation is taken over randomness in actions and outcomes (and, potentially, in the arrival process of contexts induced by the policy). The objective in Equation (8) is to choose, for each incoming search 𝑠 , an ad load that balances revenue and conversions according to the scalarization parameter 𝜆 . For a given query 𝑞 and candidate ad load 𝑖 , the relevant objects are the conditional mean outcomes 

E[Revenue 𝑠 | 𝑞 𝑠 = 𝑞, 𝑎 𝑠 = 𝑖 ] and E[Conversion 𝑠 | 𝑞 𝑠 = 𝑞, 𝑎 𝑠 = 𝑖 ].       

> 9By definition, Revenue 𝑠 =0 if no sponsored listing is installed. If a sponsored listing at position 𝑖 is installed, Revenue 𝑠 equals the minimum bid required for the advertiser to retain position 𝑖 under the GSP rules.

17 If these quantities were known and stable, the platform could select the ad load that maximizes expected reward. In practice, however, both these components are unknown; as such the platform must trade off learning these components through sufficient exploration with exploiting the information it has already gained. Note that each search arrives with a context (in our case 𝑥 𝑠 , as defined earlier). Thus, a natural starting point for the adaptive ad-load design problem is contextual bandits, e.g., LinUCB (Li et al. 2010; Chu et al. 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori et al. 2011) or parametric Thompson sampling (Agrawal and Goyal 2013). These methods are theoretically appealing when rewards are generated by a stable/stationary parametric model over well-defined contexts and context arrivals are i.i.d. Unfortunately, our environment departs from these assumptions in four important ways. First, ad-load decisions can affect subsequent user behavior, so context arrivals in our setting are not strictly policy-invariant, i.e., the arrival of contexts can be non-i.i.d. and policy-dependent. This is often referred to as adversarial contexts in bandit settings (Lattimore and Szepesv ´ari 2020). Second, the platform may not be able to pre-define and track all the relevant contextual variables that can affect the reward function, e.g., advertiser entry/exit, set of apps available, budget depletion, bid changes, user-demand, and seasonality. Third, even if the firm could identify all the relevant contextual variables, it is unclear what parametric form the reward function would take. Fourth, reward mappings are non-stationary over time; as shown in §4.2.2, within-query shifts are empirically important. Recent work relaxes some of these assumptions but not all. For example, Cheung et al. (2019); Russac et al. (2019) model non-stationarity via discounting/sliding-window, but still assume that the platform knows all the relevant contextual variables that affect the reward model and a linear (parametric) reward model. 10 Jain et al. (2024) allow for adversarial context arrivals and non-parametric reward models in contextual bandits setting. However, their model still requires the platform to know and define all the relevant contextual variables that affect the reward model, and assumes that rewards are stationary and stable. Taken together, these gaps imply three design requirements for our setting: (i) model-free reward estimation under partial observability of relevant contextual features, (ii) explicit adaptation to drifting rewards, and (iii) persistent exploration that remains operationally stable. We address these requirements with our proposed adaptive ad load algorithm introduced next. 

6 Adaptive Ad Load Design 

We propose and implement exploration-augmented Locally Adaptive Ad Load (e-LAAL ). The notation is intentional: LAAL denotes the adaptive query-level decision rule, while the prefix e denotes the exploration layer in the deployed system. Throughout, “locally” refers to estimation that is local in query and in time :LAAL estimates rewards separately for each query using only recent observations from a sliding window—i.e., it is a query-level, sliding-window greedy rule. 

6.1 e-LAAL Architecture and Traffic Allocation 

e-LAAL combines two components: (i) an adaptive arm that runs LAAL , and (ii) parallel static arms 

{𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6} inherited from the first experiment. Let 𝑤 𝑒 denote arm-level traffic shares of the static arms 

> 10 They also introduce additional tuning and exploration-safety trade-offs that can be difficult to deploy in production.

18 and define 

𝜖 ≡∑︁   

> 𝑒 ∈ { 𝐶,𝑇 2,...,𝑇 6}

𝑤 𝑒 . (9) Thus, 𝜖 is the fixed exploration budget, while 1 − 𝜖 is served by the adaptive LAAL arm. In our deployment, 

𝜖 = 0.10, so 10% of users are permanently allocated to static exploration and 90% to LAAL (Table 4). This architecture separates exploration from exploitation in a controlled way. Static arms ensure persistent support for every ad-load level and LAAL exploits these continually refreshed observations to adapt ad load across queries and over time. The static cohorts are also used to estimate contemporaneous fixed ad load (always show 𝑖 ads) counterfactuals; see §8.1 for details. Table 4: Traffic Allocation under e-LAAL 

Condition Share of Users (𝑤 𝑒 )

𝐶 (1 ad) 5% 

𝑇 2 (2 ads) 1% 

𝑇 3 (3 ads) 1% 

𝑇 4 (4 ads) 1% 

𝑇 5 (5 ads) 1% 

𝑇 6 (6 ads) 1% LAAL (adaptive) 90% e-LAAL (all conditions combined) 100% 

6.2 LAAL Decision Rule and Algorithm 

We now describe the adaptive LAAL policy, which runs on 90% of the traffic. LAAL is a deployable policy for pursuing the cumulative-reward objective in Equation (8) : it uses recent query-level outcomes to track the contemporaneous reward-maximizing ad load as the reward frontier changes over time. It is adaptive along two dimensions. First, it is query-adaptive : different queries can receive different ad loads because {𝑟 𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 )} 6

> 𝑖 =1

differs across queries. Second, it is time-adaptive : for a fixed query, the selected ad load can change as recent outcomes update, allowing the policy to respond to shifts in market conditions (e.g., brand entry/exit, bidder-quality changes). Operationally, for each incoming search, LAAL combines local recency-based estimation with greedy action selection: 

• Sliding-window reward estimation. For each query–ad-load pair (𝑞, 𝑖 ), LAAL estimates recent mean conversion and revenue per search using a fixed-length sliding window. 11 

• Greedy ad-load selection. LAAL maps these estimates into a scalarized reward and selects the ad load with the highest estimated reward. In deployment, LAAL maximizes the per-search reward in Equation (7) . For each query 𝑞 , it forms sliding-window estimates for each ad load 𝑖 ∈ { 1, . . . , 6}. Let ℎ denote window length, and define the sliding window 𝑊 𝑡 (𝑞 ) as: 

𝑊 𝑡 (𝑞 ) = {𝑠 ′ : 𝑞 𝑠 ′ = 𝑞, 𝑡 − ℎ ≤ 𝑡 𝑠 ′ < 𝑡 }. (10) 

> 11 Using fixed-length windows (or related forgetting schemes) to handle non-stationarity is common in online learning and bandits (Tr` ov` o et al. 2020; Cavenaghi et al. 2021; Cheung et al. 2019).

19 calendar time                        

> 𝑡 1−ℎ𝑡 1𝑡 2−ℎ𝑡 2=𝑡 1+Δ
> search 𝑠 1search 𝑠 2
> Δ
> 𝑊 𝑡 1(𝑞 )=[𝑡 1−ℎ, 𝑡 1)
> 𝑊 𝑡 2(𝑞 )=[𝑡 2−ℎ, 𝑡 2)

Figure 6: Sliding-window update for two searches of the same query 𝑞 , separated by Δ. LAAL uses 

𝑊 𝑡 (𝑞 ) = [𝑡 − ℎ, 𝑡 ); as the window shifts from 𝑡 1 to 𝑡 2, old data are dropped and new data are added. Figure 6 depicts how the sliding window 𝑊 𝑡 (𝑞 ) is used for two searches of the same query 𝑞 , 𝑠 1 and 𝑠 2,separated by a time difference of Δ. Notice that for the same query in the newer search ( 𝑠 2), the older data is dropped and only data from the most recent time-window of length ℎ is considered. Next, for each ad-load 𝑖 , let 𝑛 𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) denote the number of observations in the recent window for query 𝑞 

when ad load 𝑖 was shown: 

𝑛 𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) =∑︁   

> 𝑠 ′∈𝑊 𝑡 (𝑞 )

1{𝑎 𝑠 ′ = 𝑖 }. (11) Using these observations, LAAL computes two local means (the two 𝜇 -terms): b𝜇 𝐶,𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ), the local mean conversion per search , and b𝜇 𝑅,𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ), the local mean revenue per search , both for query 𝑞 under ad load 𝑖 :

b𝜇 𝐶,𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) =

Í𝑠 ′ ∈𝑊 𝑡 (𝑞 ) 1{𝑎 𝑠 ′ = 𝑖 } Conversion 𝑠 ′

𝑛 𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) + 𝛿 , b𝜇 𝑅,𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) =

Í𝑠 ′ ∈𝑊 𝑡 (𝑞 ) 1{𝑎 𝑠 ′ = 𝑖 } Revenue 𝑠 ′

𝑛 𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) + 𝛿 , (12) where 𝛿 > 0 is a small stability constant. LAAL then computes b𝑟 𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ), the estimated local reward for choosing ad load 𝑖 on query 𝑞 at time 𝑡 :

b𝑟 𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) = 𝜆 b𝜇 𝑅,𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) + b𝜇 𝐶,𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) − 𝜂𝑖, (13) selects ad load: 

𝑎 𝑡 (𝑞 ) ∈ arg max  

> 𝑖 ∈ { 1,..., 6}

b𝑟 𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ).

We set 𝜂 to a very small number; thus −𝜂 × 𝑖 is a small tie-break regularizer that breaks near ties in favor of fewer ads. To stabilize sparse queries, LAAL applies greedy selection only when the query has at least 𝑚 

observations in the window; otherwise, it returns the default ad load of 𝑖 def . We discuss the choice of the hyperparameters ( ℎ, 𝛿, 𝜂, 𝑚, 𝑖 def ) in §6.5. Algorithm 1 presents the details of the deployed procedure. 

Conditional Cohort-Invariance Assumption. LAAL pools recent observations from both the LAAL and static cohorts to estimate query–ad-load rewards (i.e., to estimate Equations (11) and (12) ). Pooling improves support for each query–ad-load pair and, as such, improves precision. However, it requires immediate per-search outcomes to be conditionally comparable across cohorts: after conditioning on query, time, and displayed ad load, revenue and conversion responses are assumed to be independent of whether the observation came from a static or adaptive cohort. This assumption is weaker than requiring search behavior to be 20 policy-invariant; it does not require identical future search behavior across cohorts, and the static cohorts are maintained precisely because ad load may affect subsequent usage. Instead, it rules out unobserved regime-specific differences in immediate search-level responses after conditioning on query, time, and realized ad load. We formally test and establish the validity of this assumption in Web Appendix §E. Further, note that while this assumption is relevant for the quality of LAAL’s learned reward estimates, it does not affect the direct evaluation of realized deployment outcomes in §7. If the assumption fails, the pooled estimates used by LAAL may be noisier or biased for the LAAL cohort, potentially reducing the quality of the policy’s recommendations. However, outcomes for the LAAL arm and the static arms are observed directly in their respective randomized cohorts during deployment. Thus, the deployment results remain informative about how the implemented policy performed in production. 

Illustrative example. We now present a simple example using a single query and two adjacent windows separated by one day to illustrate how LAAL works. Suppose LAAL uses only the last ℎ = 3 days of data, 

𝜆 = 0.01 , and the tie-breaking regularizer 𝜂 = 0.001 . Then, for query 𝑞 at time 𝑡 , the window is 𝑊 𝑡 (𝑞 ), and LAAL computes the estimated reward over this window as: 

b𝑟 𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) = 0.01 b𝜇 𝑅,𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) + b𝜇 𝐶,𝑖 (𝑞, 𝑡 ) − 0.001 𝑖. 

For illustration, we only consider a setting with three ad loads 𝑖 ∈ { 2, 4, 6} and two consecutive windows, as shown in Table 5. LAAL chooses 𝑎 𝑡 (𝑞 ) = 6 in Table 5a, when the brand is active, and the expected revenue from a higher ad load outweighs the lower conversion rate. In contrast, 𝑎 𝑡 (𝑞 ) = 2 in Table 5b. Here, the brand has become inactive, and the expected revenue from a higher ad load does not compensate for the lower conversion. See Figure 7 for a pictorial depiction. Table 5: LAAL estimates in two consecutive windows. 

> (a) Window A (brand-active period)

𝑖 b𝜇 𝐶,𝑖 b𝜇 𝑅,𝑖 b𝑟 𝑖 

2 0.50 36 0.50 + 0.36 − 0.002 = 0.858 4 0.38 60 0.38 + 0.60 − 0.004 = 0.976 6 0.27 84 0.27 + 0.84 − 0.006 = 1.104 

> (b) Window B (one day later; window shifted, brand exits)

𝑖 b𝜇 𝐶,𝑖 b𝜇 𝑅,𝑖 b𝑟 𝑖 

2 0.48 32 0.48 + 0.32 − 0.002 = 0.798 4 0.33 40 0.33 + 0.40 − 0.004 = 0.726 6 0.18 36 0.18 + 0.36 − 0.006 = 0.534 This illustrates the sliding-window mechanism: as old observations leave and new ones enter the 3-day window, the estimated reward ranking changes, and LAAL adapts the ad load for the same query over time. In sum, LAAL maximizes estimated contemporaneous reward from local evidence, while parallel static cohorts provide continual exploration by maintaining exposure to every ad-load level. 

6.3 Why e-LAAL Fits This Setting 

e-LAAL addresses the key deployment challenge in our setting: how to combine adaptive exploitation with exploration that remains operationally stable and provides meaningful fixed-policy counterfactuals. Unlike standard per-search exploration schemes in contextual bandits, e-LAAL separates exploration and exploitation through persistent user-level cohorts. This distinction is important because ad load may affect not only 21 Algorithm 1 e-LAAL Algorithm: Locally Adaptive Ad Load (LAAL) with Parallel Static Arms 

Require: each search 𝑠 arrives with context (𝑞 𝑠 , 𝑡 𝑠 ), and arm assignment 𝑒 𝑠 inherited from user assignment; 

𝑒 𝑠 ∈ { 𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6, 𝐿 }, where 𝐿 denotes the LAAL arm 

Require: window length ℎ (days), scalarization 𝜆 ≥ 0, smoothing 𝛿 > 0 , minimum window volume 𝑚 ,regularization 𝜂 ≥ 0, default ad load 𝑖 def 

Require: action set A = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} 

> 1:

for each search request 𝑠 do  

> 2:

if 𝑒 𝑠 ∈ { 𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6} then ⊲ Static cohorts: fixed ad load  

> 3:

𝑎 𝑠 ← 1 · 1{𝑒 𝑠 = 𝐶 } + Í6 

> 𝑗 =2

𝑗 1{𝑒 𝑠 = 𝑇 𝑗 } 

> 4:

else ⊲ 𝑒 𝑠 = 𝐿 : LAAL cohort  

> 5:

𝑊 ← { 𝑠 ′ : 𝑞 𝑠 ′ = 𝑞 𝑠 , 𝑡 𝑠 − ℎ ≤ 𝑡 𝑠 ′ < 𝑡 𝑠 } ⊲ Local window for query 𝑞 𝑠 , using all cohorts  

> 6:

for 𝑖 ∈ A do  

> 7:

𝑛 𝑖 ← Í𝑠 ′ ∈𝑊 1{𝑎 𝑠 ′ = 𝑖 } 

> 8:

𝐶 𝑖 ← Í𝑠 ′ ∈𝑊 1{𝑎 𝑠 ′ = 𝑖 } Conversion 𝑠 ′ 

> 9:

𝑅 𝑖 ← Í𝑠 ′ ∈𝑊 1{𝑎 𝑠 ′ = 𝑖 } Revenue 𝑠 ′ 

> 10:

b𝜇 𝐶,𝑖 ← 𝐶 𝑖 

𝑛 𝑖 + 𝛿  

> 11:

b𝜇 𝑅,𝑖 ← 𝑅 𝑖 

𝑛 𝑖 + 𝛿  

> 12:

b𝑟 𝑖 ← 𝜆 b𝜇 𝑅,𝑖 + b𝜇 𝐶,𝑖 − 𝜂𝑖  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

if Í𝑖 ∈ A 𝑛 𝑖 < 𝑚 then  

> 15:

𝑎 𝑠 ← 𝑖 def ⊲ Fallback for sparse windows  

> 16:

else  

> 17:

𝑎 𝑠 ← arg max 𝑖 ∈ A b𝑟 𝑖  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

Deploy 𝑎 𝑠 sponsored slots; observe (Conversion 𝑠 , Revenue 𝑠 ) 

> 21:

end for                               

> t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1 tt+1 t+2
> Window A
> Window B (shifted)
> Window A scores
> b𝑟 2=0.858 ,b𝑟 4=0.976 ,b𝑟 6=1.104
> ⇒𝑎 𝑡 (𝑞 )=6
> Window B scores
> b𝑟 2=0.798 ,b𝑟 4=0.726 ,b𝑟 6=0.534
> ⇒𝑎 𝑡 (𝑞 )=2
> window slides

Figure 7: Illustration of LAAL’s sliding-window adaptation. As the 3-day window shifts, estimated rewards change, and the selected ad load for the same query can switch. immediate revenue and conversion, but also subsequent search behavior and engagement. Evaluating fixed ad-load policies therefore requires users to remain under persistent regimes such as “always show 𝑖 ads,” which the static cohorts preserve. This architecture delivers four advantages for our deployment environment. 

• User-level fixed-policy counterfactuals. Because ad load may affect future usage, fixed ad-load bench-marks must be evaluated using persistent user-level regimes rather than isolated per-search randomization. 22 The static arms {𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6} maintain users under fixed ad-load policies, allowing us to estimate outcomes for policies of the form “always show 𝑖 ads,” including their induced effects on search behavior and engagement. A standard 𝜖 -greedy policy mixes ad loads within a single adaptive arm and therefore does not provide these fixed-policy counterfactuals. 

• Stable exploration support under changing context distributions. Exploration is supplied ex ante through static arms with fixed traffic shares 𝑤 𝑒 . Thus, every ad-load level continues to receive exposure even if LAAL concentrates adaptive traffic on a subset of actions. This is particularly important when ad-load decisions may influence future context arrivals: realized query-level support can differ from the platform’s intended traffic allocation, but the static cohorts provide a persistent exploration floor. 

• Model-free adaptation to a drifting reward frontier. LAAL estimates query-level rewards directly from recent outcomes rather than relying on a prespecified reward model. This reduces dependence on observing and encoding all drivers of rewards, such as advertiser entry and exit, budget depletion, bid changes, relevance shifts, seasonality, and demand changes. Through sliding-window updates, the policy adapts as these factors shift the revenue–conversion frontier over time. 

• Production-friendly implementation. e-LAAL operates as a lightweight decision layer on top of the platform’s existing prediction, auction, and ranking systems. It does not require rebuilding the underlying advertising infrastructure or deploying a complex end-to-end learning system. Instead, it uses recent query-level outcomes and a small set of persistent exploration cohorts to adapt ad load at scale. Together, these features make e-LAAL suitable for sponsored-search environments where reward mappings evolve over time and credible fixed-policy counterfactuals are essential for deployment evaluation. 

6.4 Theoretical Guarantee for e-LAAL 

In this section, we formalize the performance of e-LAAL in a non-stationary environment. The benchmark is a dynamic query-level oracle that can choose the best ad load for a fixed query as its reward frontier changes over time. The key complication, relative to standard non-stationary bandit analyses, is that exploration in e-LAAL is supplied through persistent user-level static cohorts rather than direct per-search randomization. As a result, the realized query-level support for each ad-load arm may differ from the platform’s designed traffic shares. The theorem below reports the optimized-rate implication under regular query arrivals; Web Appendix §F provides the corresponding finite-sample bound for arbitrary exploration mass and window length. For simplicity, regret is stated in normalized reward units, with raw-unit regret obtained by rescaling by the reward bound. 

Theorem 1 (Dynamic regret of e-LAAL) . Fix query 𝑞 . Assume the number of realized searches for query 𝑞 

during [0, 𝑇 ] satisfies 𝑁 = Θ (𝑇 ), and the query arrivals are regular enough that each ℎ-time window contains on the order of 𝑁 ℎ /𝑇 searches. Under the assumptions stated in Web Appendix §F, after normalizing rewards and optimizing over exploration mass and window length, the dynamic regret of Algorithm 1 is bounded, with high probability, by 

𝑅 dyn  

> 𝑞

(𝑇 ) = ˜𝑂 



¯𝑐 1/4𝑐 −1/4𝑇 3/4  𝐾 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 )1/4

.

Here 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 ) is the variation budget, 𝐾 is the number of arms, 𝑐 is the minimum-support coefficient, and ¯𝑐 is the total-static-traffic upper-bound coefficient. 

23 Proof. See Web Appendix §F. The query-level guarantee reflects the local nature of LAAL: each query evolves according to its own reward frontier and support process. Platform-level performance aggregates these query-level decisions weighted by search volume. The coefficients 𝑐 and ¯𝑐 account for the gap between the design exploration budget and the realized query-level exploration traffic. The coefficient 𝑐 lower bounds the observed traffic on each static arm by its design weight. The coefficient ¯𝑐 upper bounds the total realized traffic from static cohorts by their total exploration weight. Thus, these parameters capture deviations between assigned user-level cohort shares and realized query-level static traffic. If there is no such deviation and the realized exploration traffic exactly matches the design exploration budget, then 𝑐 = ¯𝑐 = 1. The regret bound combines the standard non-stationary bandit tradeoff between estimation noise and temporal drift with the additional cost and support role of static exploration cohorts. The proof follows the standard logic of non-stationary bandit analysis, where sliding-window estimators balance estimation noise against temporal drift (Tr `ov `o et al. 2020; Cavenaghi et al. 2021; Cheung et al. 2019). The new feature in our setting is the exploration architecture. In canonical bandit models, exploration probabilities are typically controlled directly at the decision level. In e-LAAL, exploration is supplied by persistent user-level static cohorts, but regret is evaluated on the realized search stream for a fixed query. Our analysis therefore accounts for the fact that realized query-level support can differ from the assigned cohort shares. The support coefficients in the theorem make this distinction explicit and adapt standard non-stationary regret arguments to the parallel-static-cohort implementation used in our deployment. 

6.5 Implementation Details 

We now discuss the three main parameters that are used in the deployment below. 

• Scalarization parameter in the objective function ( 𝜆 ): In principle, 𝜆 should reflect the platform’s monetary value of an incremental conversion (e.g., downstream engagement, retention, or LTV). Because these downstream outcomes are not observed in our data, we use 𝜆 as a scale-normalization parameter to convert short-run ad revenue into conversion-equivalent units, so that the two components in Equation (7) are comparable. We calibrate 𝜆 from the first experiment: the uniform policies {𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6} trace an empirical revenue–conversion frontier; over this feasible menu, the relationship is approximately linear, implying a near-constant local exchange rate between conversion losses and revenue gains. We therefore set 

𝜆 ≈ − ΔConversion 

ΔRevenue ,

which yields 𝜆 ≈ 0.01 in our data (Table 2). This calibration is not a claim about long-run welfare weights; rather it anchors LAAL to the platform’s revealed short-run rate of substitution across feasible uniform ad-load policies. 

• Exploration budget ( 𝜖 ): As discussed earlier, exploration is fixed ex ante through parallel static arms as defined in Equation (9) . In our deployment, 𝜖 = 0.10 : 10% of traffic is permanently allocated to static arms (5% to 𝐶 , 1% to each 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6), while 90% is assigned to the adaptive LAAL arm. 

• Algorithmic hyperparameters ( ℎ, 𝑚, 𝜂, 𝛿, 𝑖 def ): We set ℎ = 3 days, 𝑚 = 100 , 𝜂 = 10 −3, 𝛿 = 10 −6, and fallback load 𝑖 def = 4. The reasons for these choices are discussed briefly below: 24 • ℎ = 3 days balances responsiveness and variance. Shorter windows react faster to market-state changes (e.g., advertiser entry/exit) but are noisier; longer windows are more stable but slower to adapt. A 3-day horizon provided sufficient sample support while preserving timely adaptation. 

• 𝑚 = 100 enforces a minimum evidence threshold before greedy selection. This guards against unstable action flips on sparse queries where window estimates are high-variance. 

• 𝜂 = 10 −3 is a small tie-break regularizer that favors lower ad loads only when estimated rewards are nearly equal. 

• 𝛿 = 10 −6 is a numerical smoothing constant to avoid division instability in very low-count cells; it is intentionally negligible relative to observed counts and does not affect estimates when support is adequate. 

• 𝑖 def = 4 is the default ad load used when the query is sparse in the recent window. Using the historical data on static-cohorts obtained from the last month of the first experiment, we set 𝑖 def to the uniform ad load that maximizes expected reward on a low-volume search query. The definition of low volume query follows the same definition as in deployment of LAAL. See Web Appendix §G for the detailed analysis. 

7 Empirical Performance of the Adaptive Ad Load Policy 

The e-LAAL architecture was deployed at the platform level, and we now report the results from the deployment for a 22-day steady-state window from December 8 to 29, 2023. 12 During this period, user assignment is fixed: 90% of traffic is routed to the adaptive LAAL arm and 10% remains in the static exploration arms 

{𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6} (as shown in Table 4). In the rest of this section, we address three empirical questions on the performance of our adaptive ad load policy in deployment. (1) Does e-LAAL improve the revenue–conversion trade-off relative to static ad-load policies? (2) Does LAAL adapt ad load across query segments in economically sensible ways? (3) Does LAAL adapt over time when market conditions shift (brand entry/exit)? 

7.1 Main Results 

Table 6: Summary Statistics of the Deployment 

𝐶 𝑇 2 𝑇 3 𝑇 4 𝑇 5 𝑇 6 LAAL e-LAAL 

User Count 1,121,219 223,690 222,024 222,586 221,871 221,961 20,097,353 22,330,704 Searches 3,859,143 776,181 776,749 779,883 776,194 781,223 69,851,684 77,601,057 Revenue/User a 25.80 29.48 31.17 33.11 36.11 36.68 36.13 35.47 Conversion/User 2.152 2.104 2.101 2.091 2.064 2.054 2.127 2.126 Daily Eng. (%) 8.45 8.44 8.38 8.34 8.37 8.35 8.43 8.43 Searches/User 3.44 3.47 3.50 3.50 3.50 3.52 3.48 3.47  

> Note: aScaled by an undisclosed multiplier.
> 12 The adaptive LAAL arm was launched soon after the first experiment ended (November 17, 2023), but the system required a short ramp-up period before reaching steady state.

25 Summary statistics from platform-level deployment. Table 6 provides four immediate facts about the deployment. First, the scale is large: e-LAAL serves 22 .33 million users and 77 .60 million searches in 22 days, with the adaptive LAAL arm alone covering 20 .10 million users and 69 .85 million searches ( ≈ 90% of traffic). Second, the static arms remain large in absolute size ( ≈ 0.22 M– 1.12 M users each), so exploration and benchmarking are statistically meaningful throughout deployment. Third, the table reproduces the core economics from the first experiment (Table 1): as static ad load increases from 𝐶 to 𝑇 6, revenue per user rises monotonically (25.80 → 36.68), while conversion per user falls (2.152 → 2.054), confirming a stable revenue–conversion trade-off. Fourth, LAAL improves on this frontier: revenue per user is 36.13 (essentially 𝑇 5-level, 36.11), but conversion per user is 2.127 (higher than 𝑇 5: 2.064, and 𝑇 6: 2.054, and close to 𝐶 : 2.152). Note that the actual revenue and conversion numbers differ from those in Table 1 because the first experiment lasted 66 days, while the deployment statistics come from a 22-day period; as such, conversions and revenue are proportionally smaller here. 13 

The system-level e-LAAL outcome remains close to LAAL (35.47 revenue/user; 2.126 conversion/user), indicating that the fixed 10% exploration layer preserves learning and benchmarking with limited performance loss. Finally, daily engagement does not show notable differences across cohorts. LAAL has slightly lower engagement than 𝐶 and 𝑇 2, but these differences are not statistically significant; Web Appendix §C.3 reports the corresponding tests. Searches per user are also tightly clustered across cohorts (3.44–3.52), suggesting that outcome differences are not driven by large differences in search intensity across arms. Overall, Table 6 shows that at production scale, e-LAAL preserves the monetization gains of high ad-load policies while recovering a substantial share of the conversion losses they typically induce. 

Evaluation objects and normalization. The summary statistics above are descriptive. To make policy comparisons valid under unequal cohort traffic shares, we use inverse-propensity normalization (Horvitz and Thompson 1952; Yoganarasimhan et al. 2023). Let 𝑤 𝑒 be the assignment probability to cohort 𝑒 . For 

𝑌 ∈ { Revenue , Conversion }, define 

b𝑌 𝑒 = 1

𝑤 𝑒 ∑︁ 𝑠 : 𝑒 𝑠 =𝑒 

𝑌 𝑠 . (14) For static cohorts 𝑒 ∈ { 𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6}, b𝑌 𝑒 is an unbiased estimate of the total outcome if the full population were assigned to the corresponding fixed policy (“always show 𝑖 ads”). Because LAAL is trained using data from all cohorts, the policy-relevant system estimand is the deployed mixture: 

b𝑌 e-LAAL =∑︁    

> 𝑒 ∈ { 𝐶,𝑇 2,...,𝑇 6,𝐿 }

𝑤 𝑒 b𝑌 𝑒 =∑︁ 

> 𝑠

𝑌 𝑠 . (15) Thus, e-LAAL is the correct “policy + exploration” benchmark for deployment comparisons. 

Frontier shift under deployment. Figure 8a compares static cohorts, the LAAL cohort, and e-LAAL in the empirical revenue–conversion space. Two patterns emerge. First, LAAL/e-LAAL improves the empirical revenue–conversion trade-off relative to uniform static policies: it reaches revenue levels close to high-ad-load static rules (e.g., always show five ads, i.e., 𝑇 5) while maintaining conversions closer to low-ad-load rules (e.g.,   

> 13 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 /𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑐ℎ /𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 is a more comparable metric that controls for the length of the experiment and this metric is similar across both experiments.

26 (a) Revenue–conversion across fixed ad-load cohorts, LAAL, and e-LAAL. 

> (b) Distribution of the number of ads recommended by LAAL.

Figure 8: Performance of LAAL (and system-level e-LAAL). always show two ads). This is an efficiency gain, not movement along a fixed frontier. Second, LAAL and e-LAAL are numerically close, as expected given the 90 /10 LAAL/exploration split, so the exploration cost is modest in practice. 

How the policy behaves in practice. Figure 8b shows the distribution of ad counts selected by LAAL. On average, LAAL recommends 3.1 ads per search. It uses sliding-window estimates to choose greedily in 79% of searches (those with at least 𝑚 = 100 observations in the recent window) and falls back to 𝑖 def = 4 in the remaining 21% (sparser queries). The recommendation distribution is bimodal: LAAL frequently chooses either low ad loads (conversion-oriented) or high ad loads (revenue-oriented), with fewer intermediate choices. This is consistent with the discrete nature of the decision problem: interior ad loads are optimal only under a narrow knife-edge in incremental revenue versus conversion loss. 

7.2 Heterogeneity in Policy Performance Performance across query segments. We next evaluate LAAL across the query segments defined in §4.2 (bucketed by control-group advertising CVR). Figure 9 plots the empirical revenue–conversion trade-off within each segment. LAAL improves upon fixed ad-load (or static) policies in all segments, with the most pronounced gains in the high-CVR segment, where incremental ad slots are most likely to translate into additional paid installs and revenue. Figure 10 reports the distribution of LAAL’s recommended ad loads by segment. The policy adapts in the expected direction: it recommends fewer ads on low-CVR queries (where additional slots generate little revenue and primarily displace relevant organic content) and more ads on high-CVR queries (where additional slots generate revenue). This behavior mirrors the heterogeneity patterns in §4.2 and illustrates that LAAL operationalizes those insights using only recent outcome data, without hard-coding segment membership. 

Within-query heterogeneity over time: brand entry and exit Finally, we examine the performance of LAAL in non-stationary settings, i.e., queries with explicit time variation in advertiser composition. We 27 (a) Low CVR segment (b) Mid CVR segment (c) High CVR segment 

Figure 9: Revenue–conversion trade-offs across query segments.   

> (a) Low CVR segment (b) Mid CVR segment (c) High CVR segment

Figure 10: Distribution of ad loads recommended by LAAL across query segments. 

Figure 11: Performance of LAAL and e-LAAL on non-stationary queries (brand entry/exit) 28 focus on brand queries whose focal brand app advertises on some days but not others during the 22-day deployment window. Restricting attention to queries that experience both Brand-On and Brand-Off periods during deployment yields 315 such queries, which together account for 13% of revenue, 13% of conversions, and 11% of searches in the control condition. We refer to these as non-stationary queries .Figure 11 reports the mean observed outcomes for non-stationary queries. We see that LAAL dominates static cohorts on both revenue and conversions, consistent with a key mechanism of LAAL: time-adaptive reallocation when the reward frontier shifts. A direct test of adaptivity is whether LAAL recommends different ad loads for the same query depending on brand presence. For the non-stationary queries, we compare LAAL’s recommended ad-load distributions during Brand-On and Brand-Off searches, using within-query reweighting so that queries with different Brand-On shares are comparable; details of the reweighting procedure are provided in Web Appendix §H. Figure 12 plots the resulting recommendation histograms. When the brand is absent, LAAL concentrates on lower ad loads; when the brand is present, the distribution shifts toward higher ad loads. This within-query reallocation is precisely the behavior a time-adaptive ad-load policy should exhibit in response to changing advertiser composition.      

> (a) Brand-Off state (b) Brand-On state

Figure 12: Distribution of LAAL ad-load recommendations under Brand-Off and Brand-On states for non-stationary queries. Histograms are reweighted within query to make Brand-On and Brand-Off states comparable across queries with different Brand-On shares. 

7.3 Managerial Implications 

Three implications follow from the deployment evidence. First, fixed exploration with adaptive exploitation is implementable at scale: the platform can pre-commit a small exploration budget ( 10% here) and still obtain substantial frontier gains through local adaptive exploitation. Second, query-level ad-load personalization matters : the platform can improve monetization without proportionate conversion losses by reallocating ad load at the query level rather than committing to a single global ad count; this matters because monetization-conversion trade-offs vary sharply across query types. Third, time adaptivity is economically material : when 29 advertiser composition shifts (e.g., brand entry/exit), adaptive ad-load reallocation can dominate static rules on both objectives. Taken together, the results indicate that e-LAAL is not only statistically and operationally feasible, but also managerially actionable: it provides a practical mechanism to improve monetization while preserving user outcomes in real large-scale non-stationary sponsored search platforms. 

8 Comparisons with Benchmark Policies 

The previous section compared LAAL and the deployed e-LAAL system to the contemporaneous static cohorts {𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6} using IPW-normalized outcomes from the deployment window. Those comparisons evaluate LAAL against the fixed ad-load regimes that were actually deployed alongside the adaptive arm. However, they benchmark LAAL only against the six individual “always show 𝑖 ads” regimes; they do not ask whether LAAL outperforms static rules that a platform might have selected using performance data, such as a historically chosen uniform rule or a query-specific static mapping. In this section, we therefore provide a broader benchmark analysis against static policies that are still time-invariant once chosen, but are selected using either historical or deployment-period data. We study two classes of static policies. The first class consists of uniform static policies , which show the same number of ads for every query. The second class consists of query-dependent static policies , which allow the ad load to vary by query but keep each query’s assignment fixed over time. These benchmarks allow us to separate the value of query sensitivity from the value of time adaptivity. For each policy class, we distinguish two timing regimes. A historical benchmark is selected using the 66-day experiment window and is therefore feasible ex ante before the 22-day deployment. It answers: what static policy would the platform have chosen if it had used the earlier experiment to set a rule for deployment? A deployment oracle is selected using the 22-day deployment window itself. It is not feasible ex ante; rather, it is an ex post benchmark that asks how LAAL performs relative to the best static rule in the realized deployment environment. Thus, historical benchmarks evaluate implementable static alternatives, while deployment oracles provide stronger diagnostic comparisons. 

Notation: For compactness, let 𝐻 denote the historical 66-day experiment window and 𝐷 denote the 22-day deployment window. Let S𝑊 and V𝑊 denote the sets of searches and users observed during window 

𝑊 ∈ { 𝐻, 𝐷 }. For each ad load 𝑖 ∈ A , let S𝑊 (𝑖 ) and V𝑊 (𝑖 ) denote the sets of searches and users in window 

𝑊 assigned to the static cohort that displays ad load 𝑖 . Let 𝑤 𝑖 denote the traffic share of the corresponding static cohort. For query-dependent benchmarks, let S𝑊 (𝑞, 𝑖 ) denote the sets of searches observed during window 𝑊 for query 𝑞 and ad load 𝑖 .

8.1 Uniform Static Benchmarks 

A uniform static policy chooses the same number of sponsored slots for all queries. These policies correspond directly to the fixed experimental cohorts: policy 𝑖 implements “always show 𝑖 ads.” 

Definition 3 (Uniform Static Policy Class) . For each 𝑖 ∈ A , define the uniform static policy 𝜋 𝑈 𝑖 : Q → A by 

𝜋 𝑈 𝑖 (𝑞 ) = 𝑖 ∀ 𝑞 ∈ Q . The class of uniform static policies is Π𝑈 = {𝜋 𝑈 𝑖 : 𝑖 ∈ A} .

30 For 𝑊 ∈ { 𝐻, 𝐷 } and 𝑖 ∈ A , define the sample mean reward per user under uniform ad load 𝑖 as 

b𝑅 𝑈 𝑊 (𝑖 ; 𝜆 ) := 1

|V 𝑊 (𝑖 )| ∑︁ 𝑠 ∈ S 𝑊 (𝑖 )

𝑟 (𝑦 𝑠 , 𝜆 ).

This user-level normalization preserves the interpretation of the static cohorts as persistent user-level regimes. 

Definition 4 (Historical Uniform Benchmark and Deployment Uniform Oracle) . For 𝑊 ∈ { 𝐻, 𝐷 }, define 

𝑖 𝑈,★ 𝑊 ∈ arg max 

> 𝑖 ∈ A

b𝑅 𝑈 𝑊 (𝑖 ; 𝜆 ), 𝜋 𝑈,★ 𝑊 := 𝜋 𝑈 𝑖 𝑈,★ 𝑊 

.

We call 𝜋 𝑈,★ 𝐻 the historical uniform benchmark and 𝜋 𝑈,★ 𝐷 the deployment uniform oracle .

The two benchmarks are selected by the same reward-maximization rule, but from different samples. The historical uniform benchmark 𝜋 𝑈,★ 𝐻 uses only the 66-day experiment and is therefore feasible before deployment. The deployment uniform oracle 𝜋 𝑈,★ 𝐷 uses the deployment window itself and is therefore an ex post benchmark. In our data, 𝑖 𝑈,★ 𝐻 = 3, corresponding to the 3-ad policy 𝑇 3, whereas 𝑖 𝑈,★ 𝐷 = 5, corresponding to the 5-ad policy 𝑇 5. The shift from 𝑇 3 historically to 𝑇 5 in deployment shows that even the best platform-wide static ad load changes over time. This instability is precisely the type of environment in which an adaptive policy such as LAAL can improve on fixed rules. We compare LAAL to the uniform benchmarks using user-level outcomes from the deployment window. For each outcome 𝑌 ∈ { Revenue , Conversion , Reward }, where Reward = Conversion + 0.01 × Revenue , we estimate the following equation: 

𝑌 𝑢 = 𝛼 𝑌 𝐿 +∑︁    

> 𝑗 ∈ { 𝐶,𝑇 2,...,𝑇 6}

𝛽 𝑌 𝑗 1{𝑒 (𝑢 ) = 𝑗 } + 𝜀 𝑌 𝑢 . (16) Here 𝑌 𝑢 is the total outcome for user 𝑢 over the deployment window, 𝛼 𝑌 𝐿 is the mean outcome in the LAAL arm, and 𝛽 𝑌 𝑗 measures the difference between static cohort 𝑗 and LAAL. Table 7 reports the estimates. LAAL strictly dominates the historical uniform benchmark 𝑇 3: relative to 𝑇 3, LAAL delivers significantly higher revenue and conversions, and therefore significantly higher scalarized reward. LAAL also weakly dominates the deployment uniform oracle 𝑇 5: revenue is statistically indistinguishable between LAAL and 𝑇 5, while LAAL delivers significantly higher conversions. Thus, LAAL outperforms both the feasible ex ante historical uniform benchmark as well as the ex post deployment uniform oracle. Next, we use an iso-reward line to visualize whether LAAL improves the scalarized objective relative to the best uniform static rule in deployment. Recall that the platform’s scalarized reward is Reward = Conversion + 𝜆 · Revenue .

The deployment uniform oracle 𝜋 𝑈,★ 𝐷 is the uniform static policy with the highest deployment-period reward; in our data this corresponds to 𝑇 5. Let its total deployment-period reward be 𝐵 𝑈 𝐷 := |V 𝐷 | · b𝑅 𝑈 𝐷 (𝑖 𝑈,★ 𝐷 ; 𝜆 ), where 

V𝐷 is the set of all users observed during the 22-day deployment period. Then, the associated iso-reward line 31 Table 7: User-level deployment regressions comparing LAAL to uniform static benchmarks. 

Revenue Conversion Reward 

LAAL 36.13 ∗∗∗ (0.08) 2.127 ∗∗∗ (0.000) 2.488 ∗∗∗ (0.001) 

𝐶 -10.33 ∗∗∗ (0.33) 0.025 ∗∗∗ (0.002) -0.078 ∗∗∗ (0.004) 

𝑇 2 -6.65 ∗∗∗ (0.72) -0.023 ∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.090 ∗∗∗ (0.009) 

𝑇 3 -4.96 ∗∗∗ (0.72) -0.026 ∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.075 ∗∗∗ (0.009) 

𝑇 4 -3.02 ∗∗∗ (0.72) -0.036 ∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.066 ∗∗∗ (0.009) 

𝑇 5 -0.02 (0.72) -0.063 ∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.064 ∗∗∗ (0.009) 

𝑇 6 0.55 (0.72) -0.073 ∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.067 ∗∗∗ (0.009) Obs. 22,330,704 22,330,704 22,330,704 

𝑅 2 < 0.001 < 0.001 < 0.001                    

> Note: The LAAL row reports the mean outcome in the LAAL arm. Rows 𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6report differences relative to LAAL. Reward is defined as Conversion +0.01 ·Revenue . Standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001 ,∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01 ,∗𝑝 < 0.05 .

is 

L𝑈 𝐷 := {(C , M) ∈ R2 

> +

: C + 𝜆 M = 𝐵 𝑈 𝐷 }, (17) where C denotes total conversions and M denotes total revenue in the deployment window. This line contains all revenue–conversion bundles that deliver exactly the same scalarized reward as the best uniform static policy in deployment. Points above the line have a higher reward than the deployment uniform oracle, because they deliver either more conversions for a given revenue level or more revenue for a given conversion level. Points below the line have a lower reward. Thus, the iso-reward line provides a visual test of whether LAAL improves the platform’s scalarized objective, not merely one of the two underlying outcomes. We plot this line together with LAAL, and the static cohorts in Figure 13 (along with the historical query-dependent benchmark discussed next). We see that LAAL clearly improves the reward compared to the best uniform fixed-ad load policy. 

8.2 Query-Dependent Benchmarks 

Uniform static rules ignore the cross-query heterogeneity documented in § 4.2. A stronger static benchmark therefore allows the ad load to vary across queries, while still requiring the rule to remain fixed over time. These benchmarks help separate two sources of improvement: the value of query sensitivity and the value of 

time adaptivity . If a fixed query-level rule performs close to LAAL, then most of LAAL’s gain comes from choosing different ad loads for different queries. If LAAL outperforms such a rule, then its additional gain comes from adapting within the same query as market conditions change. 

Definition 5 (Query-Dependent Static Policy Class) . Let Π𝑄 denote the class of deterministic query-dependent static policies Π𝑄 = {𝜋 : Q → A} , where 𝜋 (𝑞 ) is the fixed ad load assigned to query 𝑞 .

Since each uniform rule applies the same ad load to every query, uniform static policies are a special case of query-dependent static policies Π𝑈 ⊆ Π𝑄 .For query-dependent benchmarks, whenever |S 𝑊 (𝑞, 𝑖 )| > 0 , define the sample mean reward per search for query 𝑞 under ad load 𝑖 as 

b𝑟 𝑊 (𝑞, 𝑖 ; 𝜆 ) := 1

|S 𝑊 (𝑞, 𝑖 )| ∑︁ 𝑠 ∈ S 𝑊 (𝑞,𝑖 )

𝑟 (𝑦 𝑠 , 𝜆 ). (18) 32 Figure 13: Revenue–conversion comparison of LAAL with static benchmarks. The figure shows the static cohorts, the iso-reward line induced by the deployment uniform oracle, and the historical query-dependent benchmark. 

Definition 6 (Historical Query-Dependent Benchmark and Deployment Query-Dependent Empirical Oracle) .

For 𝑊 ∈ { 𝐻, 𝐷 } and any query 𝑞 with at least one observed query–ad-load cell in window 𝑊 , define 

𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝑊 (𝑞 ) ∈ arg max    

> {𝑖 ∈ A :| S 𝑊 (𝑞,𝑖 ) | >0}

b𝑟 𝑊 (𝑞, 𝑖 ; 𝜆 ).

For queries that do not appear in the historical window, set 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐻 (𝑞 ) = 𝑖 def . We refer to 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐻 as the historical query-dependent benchmark and to 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐷 as the deployment query-dependent empirical oracle. 

The historical query-dependent benchmark 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐻 is selected using the 66-day experiment window and is therefore feasible ex ante before deployment. It represents the best fixed query-level rule the platform can construct from historical experimental evidence. By contrast, the deployment query-dependent empirical oracle 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐷 is selected using the 22-day deployment window itself. It is not a deployable policy; rather, it is an ex post benchmark that asks how close LAAL comes to the best time-invariant query-level rule in the realized deployment environment. 

Historical query-dependent benchmark in deployment. We first evaluate the feasible ex ante benchmark 

𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐻 using deployment-window outcomes. This comparison asks whether a query-sensitive static rule selected from the earlier experiment would still perform well in the later deployment environment. For each ad load 𝑖 ∈ A , define the set of queries assigned to 𝑖 by the historical query-dependent benchmark, 

𝑄 𝐻 𝑖 := {𝑞 ∈ Q : 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐻 (𝑞 ) = 𝑖 }. Then, for any outcome 𝑌 ∈ { Revenue , Conversion }, define the IPW estimate of the deployment-window total outcome under 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐻 as 

bY𝑄 𝐻 →𝐷 (𝑌 ) =∑︁ 

> 𝑖 ∈ A

∑︁ 𝑠 ∈ S 𝐷 (𝑖 )

1{𝑞 𝑠 ∈ 𝑄 𝐻 𝑖 }

𝑤 𝑖 

𝑌 𝑠 . (19) 33 The estimator uses deployment searches from static cohort 𝑖 whenever the historical query-dependent rule would have assigned the corresponding query to ad load 𝑖 , and rescales by the static cohort traffic share 𝑤 𝑖 . Thus, it evaluates a historically selected query-level rule in the deployment environment using contemporaneous randomized support from the static arms. Using 𝑌 = Revenue and 𝑌 = Conversion in Equation (19) , we obtain the platform-level revenue and conversion totals generated by the historical query-dependent benchmark during deployment and show it in Figure 13. We see that the historical query-dependent benchmark improves the empirical revenue–conversion trade-off relative to uniform static rules, confirming the value of query sensitivity. However, it remains materially below LAAL. This gap shows that query sensitivity alone is not sufficient: a fixed query-level rule selected from historical data can become stale when within-query market conditions shift during deployment. 

Empirical regret relative to the deployment query-dependent empirical oracle. We next compare LAAL to the deployment query-dependent empirical oracle 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐷 . This oracle is selected using deployment outcomes themselves: for each query, it chooses the fixed ad load that performed best during the same 22-day deployment window. It therefore could not have been implemented ex ante at the start of deployment. We use it instead as an ex post diagnostic benchmark that measures how close LAAL comes to the best fixed query-level rule in the realized deployment environment. Let S𝐷 (𝑞, 𝐿 ) denote the set of deployment-window searches for query 

𝑞 served by the LAAL arm. Whenever |S 𝐷 (𝑞, 𝐿 )| > 0, define LAAL’s deployment-window mean reward on query 𝑞 as 

b𝑟 𝐿 𝐷 (𝑞 ; 𝜆 ) = 1

|S 𝐷 (𝑞, 𝐿 )| ∑︁ 𝑠 ∈ S 𝐷 (𝑞,𝐿 )

𝑟 (𝑦 𝑠 , 𝜆 ). (20) For each query 𝑞 , we define LAAL’s query-level empirical regret relative to the deployment query-dependent empirical oracle as 

EmpReg (𝑞 ) = b𝑟 𝐷 



𝑞, 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐷 (𝑞 ); 𝜆 



− b𝑟 𝐿 𝐷 (𝑞 ; 𝜆 ), (21) This quantity is the per-search reward gap between LAAL and the best fixed ad load for query 𝑞 , where the fixed ad load is chosen ex-post from deployment data. The deployment query-dependent empirical oracle, 

b𝑟 𝐷 



𝑞, 𝜋 𝑄,★ 𝐷 (𝑞 ); 𝜆 



, is an upper benchmark within the class of time-invariant query-level rules. It assigns a single ad load to each query for the entire deployment window based on ex-post optimal ad load during deployment. As such, it is an infeasible benchmark. LAAL, by contrast, can change the ad load for the same query over time. Therefore, empirical regret can be negative for queries where within-query non-stationarity allows LAAL to outperform any single fixed ad load over the evaluation window. For the empirical analysis, we restrict our attention to the 2,451 queries that consistently maintained sufficient support for LAAL’s greedy selection, i.e., queries with at least 100 searches during every rolling 3-day window. We rank these queries by deployment search frequency from highest to lowest and report mean empirical regret within bins of that ranking in Figure 14. We construct 95% confidence intervals using bootstrap resampling at the query level. Mean empirical regret declines with query frequency: in the highest-frequency bins, the confidence intervals include zero, indicating that LAAL performs nearly as well as the best query-dependent static rule when local support is ample. Empirical regret is larger in lower-frequency bins, where local estimation is noisier. Taken together, the query-dependent benchmark comparisons deliver two takeaways. First, allowing ad 34 Figure 14: Average empirical regret per search of LAAL relative to the deployment query-dependent empirical oracle, by query-volume bin. The sample is restricted to the 2,451 queries. load to vary across queries improves over uniform static rules, confirming the importance of query sensitivity. Second, LAAL continues to outperform the historical query-dependent benchmark and exhibits near-zero empirical regret relative to the deployment query-dependent empirical oracle on the highest-volume queries. Thus, LAAL’s gains come not only from choosing different ad loads for different queries, but also from adapting ad load within the same query as market conditions evolve. 

9 Discussion and Robustness Checks 

The benchmark results above show that LAAL improves the revenue–conversion frontier relative to both uniform and query-dependent static policies. We now examine two additional concerns about the interpretation of these gains. First, we ask whether LAAL’s performance is stable throughout the deployment window, rather than being driven by short-lived launch-period effects. Second, we ask whether the gains are driven solely by brand-query mechanics, where the focal brand advertiser’s participation decision may interact with the platform’s ad-load policy. 

9.1 Performance Over Time 

One potential concern with the deployment results is that they may not be stable over the evaluation window. Launch-period effects could inflate early gains, and performance may erode as advertisers adjust their bids, budgets, or participation. Such responses would appear as changes in observed query-level rewards, which LAAL is designed to accommodate through its sliding-window updates and which are captured as reward drift in Theorem 1. Nevertheless, whether LAAL’s relative performance remains stable during deployment is an empirical question. We assess whether LAAL’s improvement is stable over time by testing for a linear trend in daily outcomes relative to the control group. For each outcome 𝑌 ∈ { Revenue , Conversion } and date 𝑑 , we estimate 

𝑌 𝐿,𝑑 = 𝛼 𝑌 𝑌 𝐶,𝑑 + 𝛽 𝑌 𝑑 + 𝜀 𝑌 ,𝑑 , (22) where 𝑌 𝐿,𝑑 and 𝑌 𝐶,𝑑 denote the LAAL and control IPW-scaled totals on day 𝑑 , respectively, and 𝑑 is mean-centered within the 22-day window. In this specification, 𝛼 𝑌 captures the average multiplicative change in LAAL relative to control, controlling for common day-to-day shocks through 𝑌 𝐶,𝑑 , while 𝛽 𝑌 tests whether 35 LAAL’s relative performance drifts over time. Table 8: LAAL vs. Control With Time Trend 

Revenue Conversion 

Relative change 𝛼 1.3685 ∗∗∗ (0.0421) 0.9891 ∗∗∗ (0.0016) Trend 𝛽 487.04 (884.65) -5.05 (4.5351) Observations 22 22          

> Standard errors in parentheses. Significance: ∗𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001.

Table 8 reports the estimates. Consistent with the results from §7.1, LAAL increases revenue by 36.8% and decreases conversions by 1.1% relative to the control condition. Importantly, the estimated trend coefficients 

𝛽 𝑌 are statistically indistinguishable from zero for both outcomes, suggesting that LAAL’s relative performance did not erode over the 22-day evaluation window. Nevertheless, we caution that 22 days may be too short for advertisers to fully re-optimize. The analysis therefore establishes stability over the observed deployment window, but does not rule out slower or longer-run equilibrium responses. 

9.2 Robustness Beyond Brand Queries 

For brand queries, the platform often shows more ads, and the focal brand’s decision to advertise can affect which layouts are observed and how profitable additional slots are. This creates the possibility that advertiser behavior and the platform’s ad-allocation rule interact: if the brand’s propensity to advertise is itself affected by the realized ad load, then LAAL’s performance on brand queries may partially reflect this strategic response rather than purely mechanical reallocation. As a robustness check, we therefore repeat the main revenue–conversion comparison from §7.1 on 

non-brand queries only, where no single advertiser is sufficiently prominent to plausibly manipulate the overall design. The results are reported in Figure 15. On non-brand queries, LAAL continues to outperform all non-control static cohorts in conversions, and it dominates all alternatives in revenue except the highest ad-load cohorts ( 𝑇 5 and 𝑇 6). These results indicate that the gains from LAAL are not driven solely by brand-query mechanics; substantial improvements persist in the broader set of non-brand queries. 

10 Conclusion 

Ad-load design is a central supply-side decision in sponsored search: increasing sponsored inventory can raise short-run revenue, but may also crowd out relevant organic results and reduce user-side outcomes. Using a 66-day user-level randomized field experiment, we document this revenue–conversion trade-off at scale. Higher ad loads substantially increase advertising revenue, but reduce total search conversions and engagement. We further show that these effects are neither homogeneous nor stable over time. Additional slots generate large revenue gains on queries with high-conversion advertisers, but little or no incremental revenue on queries where ads convert poorly. Within-query variation in brand-advertiser presence further shows that the revenue–conversion frontier can shift as market conditions change. Motivated by these findings, we design and deploy exploration-augmented Locally Adaptive Ad Load (e-LAAL). The deployed architecture combines LAAL, a model-free query-level policy that uses recent 36 Figure 15: Revenue–conversion across fixed ad-load cohorts, LAAL, and e-LAAL on Non-Brand Queries. outcomes to adapt the number of sponsored slots, with persistent static exploration arms that maintain support and provide fixed-policy counterfactuals. In a 22-day production deployment serving over 22 million users and 77 million searches, LAAL recommends 3.1 ads per search on average and improves the empirical revenue–conversion frontier relative to deployed static benchmarks. It achieves revenue comparable to high-ad-load static policies while preserving conversions closer to low-ad-load benchmarks. The policy’s recommendations are economically interpretable: it shows fewer ads when advertiser quality is low or the brand advertiser is absent, and more ads when sponsored demand is valuable or the brand advertiser is active. The e-LAAL architecture also provides a practical and theoretically grounded way to implement adaptive ad-load allocation. By maintaining parallel static exploration arms, the platform preserves support for every ad-load level and obtains contemporaneous fixed-policy counterfactuals, while the adaptive arm exploits recent local evidence. We provide a finite-time, high-probability dynamic-regret guarantee for e-LAAL that accounts for non-stationarity, sliding-window estimation, and deviations between designed traffic shares and realized query-level support. Empirically, LAAL outperforms both uniform static benchmarks and historical query-dependent static benchmarks, and exhibits near-zero empirical regret on high-volume queries relative to an ex post deployment oracle. Together, the results show that ad load should not be treated as a fixed platform-wide parameter or as a time-invariant query-level rule. Effective ad-load design must be both query-sensitive and time-adaptive. More broadly, the paper shows that sponsored-search platforms can ease the revenue–consumer-experience trade-off not only through auction design, pricing, ranking, or targeting, but also by dynamically controlling the supply of sponsored attention. LAAL provides a lightweight, scalable, and portable blueprint for doing so in large-scale, non-stationary sponsored-search markets. 

Funding and Competing Interests 

The first author was a paid intern at the company that provided the data when the experiments were conducted. The company had no input or constraints on what is reported in the manuscript. 37 References 

Y. Abbasi-Yadkori, D. P ´al, and C. Szepesv ´ari. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 24 , pages 2312–2320, 2011. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/ 2011/hash/e1d5be1c7f2f456670de3d53c7b54f4a-Abstract.html .S. Agrawal and N. Goyal. Thompson sampling for contextual bandits with linear payoffs. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 127–135. PMLR, 2013. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v28/agrawal13.html .Apple Ads. Ads on the app store. https://ads.apple.com/app-store , 2026. Accessed: 2026-06-02. S. Athey and G. Ellison. Position auctions with consumer search. Quarterly Journal of Economics , 126(3):1213–1270, 2011. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjr028. A. Broder, M. Fontoura, V. Josifovski, and L. Riedel. To swing or not to swing: Learning when (not) to advertise. In 

Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM) , pages 1003–1012. ACM, 2008. doi: 10.1145/1458082.1458215. URL https://fontoura.org/papers/cikm2008-swing.pdf .A. Carri ´on, J. Wang, H. S. Nair, W. Xu, and Y. Zhang. Blending advertising with organic content in e-commerce: A virtual bids optimization approach. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) ,volume 37, pages 4141–4149. AAAI Press, 2023. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v37i4.25629. Also available as arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.13556. E. Cavenaghi, G. Sottocornola, F. Stella, and M. Zanker. Non-stationary multi-armed bandit: Empirical evaluation of a new concept drift-aware algorithm. Entropy , 23(3):380, 2021. doi: 10.3390/e23030380. M. Cheng, E. Ofek, and H. Yoganarasimhan. Balancing engagement and polarization: Multi-objective alignment of news content using llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13444 , 2025. W. C. Cheung, D. Simchi-Levi, and R. Zhu. Learning to optimize under non-stationarity. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) , volume 89 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1079–1087. PMLR, 2019. W. Chu, L. Li, L. Reyzin, and R. Schapire. Contextual bandits with linear payoff functions. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , volume 15 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 208–214. PMLR, 2011. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v15/chu11a.html .K. Deb, K. Sindhya, and J. Hakanen. Multi-objective optimization. In Decision sciences , pages 161–200. CRC Press, 2016. B. Edelman, M. Ostrovsky, and M. Schwarz. Internet advertising and the generalized second-price auction: Selling billions of dollars worth of keywords. American Economic Review , 97(1):242–259, 2007. doi: 10.1257/aer.97.1.242. URL https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.97.1.242 .A. Garivier and ´E. Moulines. On upper-confidence bound policies for switching bandit problems. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT) , pages 174–188, 2011. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-24412-4 16. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24412-4_16 .A. Goldfarb and C. E. Tucker. Privacy regulation and online advertising. Management Science , 57(1):57–71, 2011. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.1100.1246. A. Goli, J. Huang, D. Reiley, and N. M. Riabov. Measuring consumer sensitivity to audio advertising: a long-run field experiment on pandora internet radio. Quantitative Marketing and Economics , pages 1–31, 2025a. A. Goli, D. H. Reiley, and H. Zhang. Personalizing ad load to optimize subscription and ad revenues: Product strategies constructed from experiments on pandora. Marketing Science , 44(2):327–352, 2025b. doi: 10.1287/mksc.2022.0357. URL https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/mksc.2022.0357 .D. G. Horvitz and D. J. Thompson. A generalization of sampling without replacement from a finite universe. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 47(260):663–685, 1952. doi: 10.1080/01621459.1952.10483446. 

38 Interactive Advertising Bureau. Internet advertising revenue report: Full-year 2025 results. https: //www.iab.com/wp-content/uploads/2026/04/IAB_PwC_Internet_Ad_Revenue_Report_Full_Year_ 2025_April_2026.pdf , Apr. 2026. Accessed: 2026-06-01. L. Jain, Z. Li, E. Loghmani, B. Mason, and H. Yoganarasimhan. Effective adaptive exploration of prices and promotions in choice-based demand models. Marketing Science , 43(5):1002–1030, 2024. A. Kim, S. Balachander, and K. Kannan. On the optimal number of advertising slots in a generalized second-price auction. Marketing Letters , 23(3):851–868, Sept. 2012. doi: 10.1007/s11002-012-9193-2. R. Kohavi, A. Deng, B. Frasca, R. Longbotham, T. Walker, and Y. Xu. Trustworthy online controlled experiments: Five puzzling outcomes explained. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 786–794, 2012. S. Lahaie and D. M. Pennock. Revenue analysis of a family of ranking rules for keyword auctions. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC) , pages 50–56, 2007. doi: 10.1145/1250910.1250918. T. Lattimore and C. Szepesv´ ari. Bandit algorithms . Cambridge University Press, 2020. R. P. Leme et al. A field guide to personalized reserve prices, 2016. arXiv preprint. L. Li, W. Chu, J. Langford, and R. E. Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web , pages 661–670, 2010. G. Liao, Z. Wang, X. Wu, X. Shi, C. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Wang, and D. Wang. Cross DQN: Cross deep Q network for ads allocation in feed, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.04353 . Accepted by WWW ’22. S. Moshary. Does sponsored search advertising augment organic search? evidence from an e-commerce platform. 

Management Science , mar 2025. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.2024.04792. URL https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2024. 04792 . Articles in Advance. R. B. Myerson. Optimal auction design. Mathematics of Operations Research , 6(1):58–73, Feb. 1981. doi: 10.1287/ moor.6.1.58. URL https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/moor.6.1.58 .M. Ostrovsky and M. Schwarz. Reserve prices in internet advertising auctions: A field experiment. Journal of Political Economy , 131(12), 2023. doi: 10.1086/725702. O. Rafieian and H. Yoganarasimhan. Targeting and privacy in mobile advertising. Marketing Science , 40(2):193–218, 2021. doi: 10.1287/mksc.2020.1235. O. Rafieian, A. Kapoor, and A. Sharma. Multiobjective personalization of marketing interventions. Marketing Science ,44(2):457–477, 2025. Y. Russac, C. Vernade, and O. Capp ´e. Weighted linear bandits for non-stationary environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 , pages 12040–12049, 2019. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper/ 9372-weighted-linear-bandits-for-non-stationary-environments .H. Sagtani, M. G. Jhawar, R. Mehrotra, and O. Jeunen. Ad-load balancing via off-policy learning in a content marketplace, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.11518 .N. S. Sahni and C. Zhang. Are consumers averse to sponsored messages? the role of search advertising in information discovery. Quantitative Marketing and Economics , 22(1):63–114, 2024. doi: 10.1007/s11129-023-09270-z. A. Sayedi. Real-time bidding in online display advertising. Marketing Science , 37(4):553–568, 2018. doi: 10.1287/ mksc.2017.1083. W. Shi, C. Fu, Q. Xu, S. Chen, J. Zhang, Q. Zhu, Z. Hua, and S. Yang. Ads supply personalization via doubly robust learning. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’24) ,Boise, ID, USA, Oct. 2024. ACM. doi: 10.1145/3627673.3680035. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12799 .A. Simonov, C. Nosko, and J. M. Rao. Competition and crowd-out for brand keywords in sponsored search. Marketing Science eJournal , 2017. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:947920 .F. Tr `ov `o, S. Paladino, M. Restelli, and N. Gatti. Sliding-window thompson sampling for non-stationary settings. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 68:311–364, 2020. doi: 10.1613/jair.1.11407. 

39 H. R. Varian. Position auctions. International Journal of Industrial Organization , 25(6):1163–1178, 2007. doi: 10.1016/j.ijio.2006.10.006. B. Wang, Z. Li, J. Tang, K. Zhang, S. Chen, and L. Ru. Learning to advertise: How many ads are enough? In J. Z. Huang, L. Cao, and J. Srivastava, editors, Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: 15th Pacific-Asia Conference, PAKDD 2011, Shenzhen, China, May 24–27, 2011, Proceedings, Part II , volume 6635 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 506–518. Springer, 2011. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-20847-8 42. Y. Wang, L. Tao, and X. X. Zhang. Recommending for a multi-sided marketplace: A multi-objective hierarchical approach. Marketing Science , 2024. K. C. Wilbur. A two-sided, empirical model of television advertising and viewing markets. Marketing Science , 27(3): 356–378, May 2008. doi: 10.1287/mksc.1070.0303. URL https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/ mksc.1070.0303 .K. C. Wilbur, L. Xu, and D. Kempe. Correcting audience externalities in television advertising. Marketing Science , 32 (6):892–912, 2013. M. Yan, J. Xu, A. A. Tiwana, and M. Chatterjee. Ads allocation in feed via constrained optimization. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) , pages 3299–3307. ACM, 2020. doi: 10.1145/3394486.3403391. S. Yao and C. F. Mela. A dynamic model of sponsored search advertising. Marketing Science , 30(3):447–468, 2011. doi: 10.1287/mksc.1100.0626. Z. Ye, D. J. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Zhang, X. Chen, and Z. Xu. Cold start to improve market thickness on online advertising platforms: Data-driven algorithms and field experiments. Management Science , 69(7):3838–3860, 2023. H. Yoganarasimhan. Search personalization using machine learning. Management Science , 66(3):1045–1070, 2020. H. Yoganarasimhan, E. Barzegary, and A. Pani. Design and evaluation of optimal free trials. Management Science , 69 (6):3220–3240, 2023. S. Yuan, J. Wang, B. Chen, P. Mason, and S. Seljan. An empirical study of reserve price optimisation in real-time bidding. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) , pages 1897–1906. ACM, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2623330.2623357. W. Zhang, C. Wei, X. Meng, Y. Hu, and H. Wang. The whole-page optimization via dynamic ad allocation. In Companion Proceedings of the The Web Conference 2018 (WWW ’18) , pages 1407–1411, Lyon, France, 2018. ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-5640-4. doi: 10.1145/3184558.3191584. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3184558.3191584 .

40 Appendices 

A Brand Query Layouts 

(a) Brand Query Single-Ad Layout (b) Brand Query Three-Ad Layout Example 

Figure A1: Examples of brand query layouts: in (a), the brand appears as the sponsored Ad 1; in (b), it appears as Organic 1. 

B Data Distributions 

B.1 CDF of Search Frequency 

Figure A2: Cumulative distribution of search frequency of queries 

B.2 CDF of Impressions and Conversions 

The blue and green curves in Figure A3 show the cumulative distribution of conversions and impressions respectively. Notice that “Conversion” CDFs lie above the corresponding “Impression” CDFs. This suggests that conversions are more concentrated (across both apps and ads) than impressions. i(a) CDF of Apps (Organic and Ads). (b) CDF of Ads. 

Figure A3: Cumulative distribution of Conversions and Impressions 

C Platform Usage 

C.1 Engagement 

We evaluate whether daily engagement changes under higher ad loads. Let 𝑑 be mean-centered time within the experiment window (in days). We estimate a condition-specific levels-and-trends model with the control group as baseline: Engagement 𝑒,𝑑 = (𝛽 𝐶 + 𝛿 𝐶 𝑑 ) + 

> 6

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =2

(𝛽 𝑇 𝑗 + 𝛿 𝑇 𝑗 𝑑 ) 1{𝑒 = 𝑇 𝑗 } + 𝜀 𝑒,𝑑 (A1) Engagement 𝑒,𝑑 measures the daily engagement under experimental condition 𝑒 on day 𝑑 . Here, 𝛽 𝐶 and 𝛿 𝐶 

estimate the mean engagement and time trend of the control group respectively. If engagement trends under control are absent, we expect 𝛿 𝐶 to be statistically indistinguishable from zero. 𝛽 𝑇 𝑗 and 𝛿 𝑇 𝑗 estimate the level difference for condition 𝑇 𝑗 and the incremental trend difference for condition 𝑇 𝑗 relative to control respectively. Table A1 reports the estimates: Engagement levels decline monotonically with ad load. The control trend 

𝛿 𝐶 is small and not statistically significant, indicating no intrinsic drift in engagement absent additional ads. In contrast, we observe significantly negative incremental trends for 𝑇 4–𝑇 6, implying that daily engagement erodes over time under extreme ad loads. If the experiment were extended, this pattern suggests further engagement losses in 𝑇 4–𝑇 6 relative to control. 

C.2 Search per User 

We now test whether higher ad loads induce additional search activity. Let SearchesPerUser 𝑢 denote the total number of search queries executed by user 𝑢 during the experiment: SearchPerUser 𝑢 =∑︁ 

> 𝑠

1{𝑢 𝑠 = 𝑢 }

ii Table A1: Daily Engagement: Condition Levels and Trends per Day 

Daily Engagement Trend 

𝐶 4.95e-02 ∗∗∗ (1.00e-03) 5.82e-05 (3.16e-05) 

𝑇 2 -3e-04 ∗∗∗ (4.83e-05) 1.45e-06 (2.47e-06) 

𝑇 3 -6e-04 ∗∗∗ (4.63e-05) -1.11e-06 (3.08e-06) 

𝑇 4 -8e-04 ∗∗∗ (5.79e-05) -9.76e-06 ∗∗ (3.65e-06) 

𝑇 5 -10e-04 ∗∗∗ (4.96e-05) -6.38e-06 ∗ (3.01e-06) 

𝑇 6 -11e-04 ∗∗∗ (4.96e-05) -9.97e-06 ∗∗ (3.16e-06) Observations 396 396          

> Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the day level. Significance levels: ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗𝑝 < 0.05.

With control as the baseline, we estimate: SearchesPerUser 𝑢 = 𝜁 𝐶 +

> 6

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =2

𝜁 𝑇 𝑗 1{𝑒 (𝑢 ) = 𝑇 𝑗 } + 𝜀 𝑢 (A2) where 𝜁 𝐶 is the average under 𝐶 and 𝜁 𝑇 𝑗 estimates the deviation for condition 𝑇 𝑗 relative to 𝐶 . Table A2 presents the estimates. It shows that search intensity is higher under larger ad loads: coefficients for 𝑇 3–𝑇 6 are positive and highly significant, with the largest increase in 𝑇 6 (0.171 additional searches per user). Relative to the control mean of 𝜁 𝐶 = 5.1389, this corresponds to approximately a 3.3% increase. Table A2: Searches per User by Condition 

Searches per User 

𝐶 5.1389 ∗∗∗ (0.0060) 

𝑇 2 0.0199 (0.0170) 

𝑇 3 0.1620 ∗∗∗ (0.0170) 

𝑇 4 0.1673 ∗∗∗ (0.0170) 

𝑇 5 0.1412 ∗∗∗ (0.0160) 

𝑇 6 0.1710 ∗∗∗ (0.0160) Observations 5,057,952          

> Standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗𝑝 < 0.05.

C.3 Engagement During Deployment 

We also examine engagement during the deployment period. For each date and condition, engagement is defined as the fraction of assigned users who performed at least one search. We estimate average differences relative to LAAL while absorbing common date shocks: Engagement 𝑒,𝑑 = 𝛼 𝐿 + 𝛽 𝐶 1{𝑒 = 𝐶 } + 

> 6

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =2

𝛽 𝑇 𝑗 1{𝑒 = 𝑇 𝑗 } + 𝛾 𝑑 + 𝜀 𝑒,𝑑 . (A3) iii Here, LAAL is the omitted condition and 𝛾 𝑑 denotes date fixed effects. Thus, 𝛽 𝐶 and 𝛽 𝑇 𝑗 measure average engagement differences relative to LAAL after controlling for day-level shocks. Table A3 reports the results. 𝐶 and 𝑇 2 have higher engagement than LAAL, while the other static conditions have lower engagement than LAAL. However, only the effects of 𝑇 4 and 𝑇 6 are statistically significant. This limited significance is expected because the deployment period contains only 22 days of data. Table A3: Deployment Engagement Relative to LAAL 

Daily Engagement 

LAAL 8.43e-02 ∗∗∗ (6.19e-04) 

𝐶 1.69e-04 (3.66e-04) 

𝑇 2 1.09e-04 (3.86e-04) 

𝑇 3 -4.72e-04 (3.71e-04) 

𝑇 4 -9.55e-04 ∗ (3.89e-04) 

𝑇 5 -6.44e-04 (4.13e-04) 

𝑇 6 -7.87e-04 ∗ (3.75e-04) Observations 154          

> Standard errors in parentheses. The LAAL row reports the baseline engagement level. Other rows report differences relative to LAAL. Estimates are from Equation (A3). Significance levels: ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗𝑝 < 0.05.

D Query Segmentation Results 

D.1 Query Segmentation Summary Statistics 

Table A4 summarizes the distribution share of outcomes across query segments introduced in 4.2.1. 14 . Most of revenue and advertising conversion come from the segment 𝐾 3. The segment 𝐾 1 contributes the most to the total search and conversion share while it has a small share to the advertising results. Table A4: Query Segment Composition. Numbers show the shares under each variable. Segment #Queries Search Revenue Ads Conversion Conversion K1 3,333 0.468 0.188 0.091 0.450 K2 3,334 0.069 0.153 0.100 0.092 K3 3,333 0.059 0.553 0.733 0.081 

D.2 Regression Estimates 

Table A5 presents the regression estimates from Equation (5). 

E Conditional Cohort-Invariance Assumption 

LAAL uses observations from the adaptive cohort and the static cohorts to estimate query–ad-load outcomes. This requires that, after conditioning on the same query, ad load, and time, the cohort label does not contain       

> 14 Queries outside this 10k set account for the remaining mass: 40 .41% of searches, 10 .58% of revenue, 37 .67% of total conversions, and 7 .61% of ad conversions.

iv Table A5: Effect of Ad Load on Revenue and Conversion Across Segments 

Revenue Conversion 

Low Medium High Low Medium High 

𝐶 3.368 16.212 62.741 0.547 0.763 0.781 

𝑇 2 -0.427 (0.218) -0.094 (0.536) 14.136 ∗∗∗ (3.327) -0.011 ∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.025 ∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.016 ∗∗∗ (0.003) 

𝑇 3 -0.621 ∗∗ (0.199) 2.047 ∗∗∗ (0.547) 20.701 ∗∗∗ (4.252) -0.009 ∗∗ (0.003) -0.023 ∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.030 ∗∗∗ (0.004) 

𝑇 4 -0.510 ∗∗ (0.189) 2.330 ∗∗∗ (0.524) 25.432 ∗∗∗ (5.027) -0.017 ∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.037 ∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.033 ∗∗∗ (0.005) 

𝑇 5 -0.177 (0.173) 3.526 ∗∗∗ (0.674) 28.927 ∗∗∗ (4.743) -0.024 ∗∗∗ (0.005) -0.036 ∗∗∗ (0.006) -0.049 ∗∗∗ (0.004) 

𝑇 6 -0.255 (0.180) 4.828 ∗∗∗ (0.665) 32.887 ∗∗∗ (5.018) -0.033 ∗∗∗ (0.006) -0.060 ∗∗∗ (0.005) -0.052 ∗∗∗ (0.005) Obs. 12,313,120 1,825,671 1,548,914 12,313,120 1,825,671 1,548,914 

𝑅 2 0.001 0.010 0.072 0.176 0.048 0.029           

> Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the query level. Significance levels: ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗𝑝 < 0.05.

additional information about immediate search-level outcomes. We evaluate this condition by estimating two regressions, one for revenue and one for conversion: 

𝑌 𝑠 = 𝛼 𝑌 𝑞 𝑠 ,𝑎 𝑠 ,ℎ 𝑠 +

> 6

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝛽 𝑌 𝑖 1{𝑒 𝑠 = 𝐿 𝐴𝐴𝐿 }1{𝑎 𝑠 = 𝑖 } + 𝜀 𝑌 𝑠 , (A4) where 𝑌 𝑠 ∈ { Revenue 𝑠 , Conversion 𝑠 }, 𝑞 𝑠 is the query, 𝑎 𝑠 is the realized ad load, and ℎ𝑠 is the calendar-hour of the search. The fixed effects 𝛼 𝑌 𝑞 𝑠 ,𝑎 𝑠 ,ℎ 𝑠 absorb all query-by-ad-load-by-hour variation. Thus, each coefficient 

𝛽 𝑌 𝑖 measures whether the LAAL cohort has additional explanatory power for outcome 𝑌 , relative to the corresponding static cohort with the same realized ad load. Table A6 reports the results. The conversion coefficients are small and statistically insignificant across all ad loads. For revenue, only the LAAL-versus-𝐶 comparison at one ad is statistically significant. To assess its economic magnitude, note that Table 6 implies a control reward per search of approximately 2.152 + 0.01 × 25 .80 3.44 = 0.701 .

The significant revenue coefficient, 0.199 , changes the policy reward by only 0.01 × 0.199 = 0.002 , which is 0.002 /0.701 ≈ 0.28% of the control reward per search. Thus, although statistically detectable, the effect is economically negligible. Overall, the results do not provide economically meaningful evidence that cohort identity explains remaining revenue or conversion variation after controlling for query-by-ad-load-by-hour fixed effects. 

F Regret Guarantee for e-LAAL 

This appendix gives the finite-sample dynamic-regret guarantee for e-LAAL for a fixed query 𝑞 . It provides the detailed definitions, support conditions, and tuning argument behind Theorem 1. 

Query-level sequence and rewards. Fix a query 𝑞 , and let S𝑞 (𝑇 ) = {𝑠 1, . . . , 𝑠 𝑁 } be the realized searches containing 𝑞 during [0, 𝑇 ], ordered by time. Write 𝑡 𝑗 := 𝑡 𝑠 𝑗 , 𝑒 𝑗 := 𝑒 𝑠 𝑗 , and 𝑎 𝑗 := 𝑎 𝑠 𝑗 . We identify the static cohort 𝐶 with arm 1 , and the static cohort 𝑇 𝑖 with arm 𝑖 for 𝑖 = 2, . . . , 𝐾 . Thus the action set is vTable A6: Testing Cohort Effects Conditional on Query–Ad-Load–Hour Fixed Effects 

Revenue Conversion 

LAAL vs. 𝐶 , 1 ad 0.199 ∗ (0.080) 0.008 (0.004) LAAL vs. 𝑇 2, 2 ads 0.305 (1.888) 0.003 (0.071) LAAL vs. 𝑇 3, 3 ads 6.592 (3.434) -0.005 (0.123) LAAL vs. 𝑇 4, 4 ads 15.971 (9.870) -0.023 (0.110) LAAL vs. 𝑇 5, 5 ads 0.290 (0.594) 0.009 (0.012) LAAL vs. 𝑇 6, 6 ads 4.011 (4.108) 0.008 (0.032) Query × Ad Load × Hour FE ✓ ✓

Obs. 77,601,057 77,601,057 

𝑅 2 0.141 0.024            

> Notes: Each column estimates Equation (A4) on the full deployment search sample. Each row reports the LAAL coefficient for realized ad load 𝑖 , comparing LAAL searches with the corresponding static cohort after absorbing the fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the query level. Significance levels: ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗𝑝 < 0.05.

A = {1, . . . , 𝐾 }, and the cohort set is {𝐿 } ∪ A , where 𝐿 denotes the LAAL cohort. Let the raw scalarized reward be 

𝑟 raw  

> 𝑗

:= 𝑟 (𝑦 𝑠 𝑗 , 𝜆 ) = 𝜆 Revenue 𝑠 𝑗 + Conversion 𝑠 𝑗 , 0 ≤ 𝑟 raw  

> 𝑗

≤ 𝐵 𝑟 < ∞.

For the proof, normalize rewards by 𝐵 𝑟 : ˜𝑟 𝑗 := 𝑟 raw  

> 𝑗

/𝐵 𝑟 ∈ [ 0, 1]. All mean rewards, variation budgets, regret quantities, and the tie-break parameter 𝜂 in this appendix are expressed in normalized units. Bounds in raw reward units are recovered by multiplying by 𝐵 𝑟 .For each arm 𝑖 ∈ A , define the possibly time-varying mean reward 

𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 := E[ ˜𝑟 𝑗 | 𝑎 𝑗 = 𝑖, 𝑞 ].

Let 𝑖 ★𝑗 ∈ arg max 𝑖 ∈ A 𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 . The dynamic regret over [0, 𝑇 ] is 

𝑅 dyn  

> 𝑞

(𝑇 ) :=

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

 𝜇 𝑖 ★𝑗 , 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑎 𝑗 , 𝑗 

,

and the query-level variation budget, with 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 ) > 0, is 

𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 ) :=

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =2

max  

> 𝑖 ∈ A

|𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 −1 |.

Design weights and query-level support. Let 𝑤 𝑒 denote the pre-assigned user-level cohort weights, with 

𝑤 𝐿 + Í𝐾 𝑖 =1 𝑤 𝑖 = 1. Define the total static design mass 𝜖 := Í𝐾 𝑖 =1 𝑤 𝑖 = 1 − 𝑤 𝐿 , and let 𝑤 min := min 𝑖 ∈ A 𝑤 𝑖 .User assignment is fixed by design, but for a fixed query 𝑞 , realized query-level traffic may not match the user-level design shares. Let 𝜀 𝑒, 𝑗 := Pr (𝑒 𝑗 = 𝑒 ) denote the expected share of the 𝑗 th query-𝑞 search coming vi from cohort 𝑒 . We assume that there exist constants 𝑐 ∈ ( 0, 1] and ¯ 𝑐 ≥ 1 such that, for every search 𝑗 ,

𝜀 𝑖, 𝑗 ≥ 𝑐 𝑤 𝑖 , ∀𝑖 ∈ A , (A5) and 𝐾 ∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜀 𝑖, 𝑗 ≤ ¯𝑐 𝜖 . (A6) The coefficient 𝑐 is the minimum-support coefficient: it lower bounds realized query-level traffic on each static arm by its design weight. The coefficient ¯𝑐 is the total-static-traffic upper-bound coefficient: it upper bounds total realized static-cohort traffic by the total design exploration mass. If realized query-level static traffic exactly matches the design exploration shares, then 𝑐 = ¯𝑐 = 1. 

Sliding-window estimation and fallback. At each search 𝑠 𝑗 , LAAL uses the most recent ℎ units of time: 

𝑊 𝑗 (ℎ) := {ℓ < 𝑗 : 𝑡 𝑗 − ℎ ≤ 𝑡 ℓ < 𝑡 𝑗 }.

Because the searches are ordered by time, write 𝑊 𝑗 (ℎ) = {𝑏 𝑗 , . . . , 𝑗 − 1}, and let 𝑀 𝑗 := |𝑊 𝑗 (ℎ)| = 𝑗 − 𝑏 𝑗 .Define the number of warm-up searches 𝑁 ℎ := |{ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑁 : 𝑡 𝑗 − 𝑡 𝑠 1 < ℎ }| , and set 𝐽 ℎ := 𝑁 ℎ + 1. Thus, for 

𝑗 ≥ 𝐽 ℎ, the lookback window is not truncated by the start of the horizon. Define the post-warm-up index sets 

J𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) := { 𝑗 ∈ { 𝐽 ℎ, . . . , 𝑁 } : 𝑀 𝑗 ≥ 𝑚 }, J𝐹 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) := { 𝑗 ∈ { 𝐽 ℎ, . . . , 𝑁 } : 𝑀 𝑗 < 𝑚 }.

The realized LAAL greedy and fallback rounds are 𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 := { 𝑗 ∈ J 𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) : 𝑒 𝑗 = 𝐿 } and 𝑆 𝐹 𝐿 := { 𝑗 ∈J𝐹 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) : 𝑒 𝑗 = 𝐿 }. The post-warm-up static rounds are 𝑆 + 

> 𝑆

:= { 𝑗 ∈ { 𝐽 ℎ, . . . , 𝑁 } : 𝑒 𝑗 ∈ A} , and the fallback count is 𝐹 𝑞 (𝑇 ; ℎ, 𝑚 ) := |𝑆 𝐹 𝐿 |. When J𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) ≠ ∅, define 

𝑀 (𝑚 )− := min    

> 𝑗 ∈ J 𝐺 (ℎ,𝑚 )

𝑀 𝑗 , 𝑀 (𝑚 )+ := max    

> 𝑗 ∈ J 𝐺 (ℎ,𝑚 )

𝑀 𝑗 .

For each arm 𝑖 ∈ A , let 

𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 :=∑︁   

> ℓ∈𝑊 𝑗 (ℎ)

1{𝑎 ℓ = 𝑖 }

be the number of action-𝑖 observations in the window. The LAAL estimator is 

b𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 =

Íℓ ∈𝑊 𝑗 (ℎ) ˜𝑟 ℓ 1{𝑎 ℓ = 𝑖 }

𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 + 𝛿 sm 

.

Here 𝛿 sm > 0. On post-warm-up LAAL rounds, for tie-break penalty 𝜂 > 0 , the algorithm plays 𝑎 𝑗 ∈

arg max 𝑖 ∈ A {b𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − 𝜂𝑖 } for 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 , and plays the default 𝑎 𝑗 = 𝑖 def for 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆 𝐹 𝐿 . On static rounds, cohort 𝑖 

deterministically plays action 𝑖 .

Assumptions. (E1) ˜ 𝑟 𝑗 ∈ [ 0, 1] for all 𝑗 .(E2) Conditional on the realized query-search sequence S𝑞 (𝑇 ), the cohort of each search is drawn vii independently across searches, with query-level cohort shares satisfying (A5) and (A6). (E3) For each arm 𝑖 , the noise ˜𝑟 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 is conditionally mean-zero and bounded in [− 1, 1] on rounds where 𝑎 𝑗 = 𝑖 .(E4) Conditional cohort invariance holds for immediate search-level rewards: after conditioning on query 𝑞 , search time 𝑡 𝑗 , and realized ad load 𝑖 , the conditional mean reward does not depend on whether the observation comes from the LAAL cohort or the corresponding static cohort. 

Lemma E.1 (Per-arm support from static cohorts). Assume J𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) ≠ ∅. For each 𝑖 ∈ A and 

𝑗 ∈ J 𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ), define the number of static observations of arm 𝑖 inside the window: 

𝑍 𝑖, 𝑗 :=∑︁   

> ℓ∈𝑊 𝑗 (ℎ)

1{𝑒 ℓ = 𝑖 }.

Then 𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 ≥ 𝑍 𝑖, 𝑗 , because static cohort 𝑖 always plays action 𝑖 . The conditional mean of 𝑍 𝑖, 𝑗 is 

𝑚 𝑖, 𝑗 :=∑︁   

> ℓ∈𝑊 𝑗 (ℎ)

𝜀 𝑖,ℓ ≥ 𝑐 𝑤 𝑖 𝑀 𝑗 ≥ 𝑐 𝑤 min 𝑀 (𝑚 )− .

By Assumption E2, for any 𝛼 ∈ ( 0, 1),Pr 



𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 < (1 − 𝛼 )𝑐 𝑤 min 𝑀 (𝑚 )−



≤ exp 



− 𝛼 2

2 𝑐 𝑤 min 𝑀 (𝑚 )−



.

A union bound over 𝑖 ∈ A and 𝑗 ∈ J 𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) gives Pr 



∃ 𝑗 ∈ J 𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ), ∃𝑖 ∈ A : 𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 < (1 − 𝛼 )𝑐 𝑤 min 𝑀 (𝑚 )−



≤ 𝐾 𝑁 exp 



− 𝛼 2

2 𝑐 𝑤 min 𝑀 (𝑚 )−



.

Choice of 𝛼 and 𝑛 min . Assume J𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) ≠ ∅. Fix 𝜉 ∈ ( 0, 1), and choose 

𝛼 :=√︄ 2 log (3𝐾 𝑁 /𝜉 )

𝑐 𝑤 min 𝑀 (𝑚 )−

, 𝑛 min := (1 − 𝛼 )𝑐 𝑤 min 𝑀 (𝑚 )− ,

assuming 𝛼 < 1. Then Lemma E.1 implies that the support event 

Esupp := {∀ 𝑗 ∈ J 𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ), ∀𝑖 ∈ A , 𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 ≥ 𝑛 min }

satisfies Pr (E supp ) ≥ 1 − 𝜉 /3. 

Lemma E.2 (Total static traffic concentration). Let 𝑌 𝑗 := 1{𝑒 𝑗 ∈ A} for 𝑗 = 𝐽 ℎ, . . . , 𝑁 . Then 

E[𝑌 𝑗 ] =

> 𝐾

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜀 𝑖, 𝑗 ≤ ¯𝑐 𝜖 . 

viii Therefore, E|𝑆 + 

> 𝑆

| ≤ ¯𝑐 𝜖 𝑁 . By Assumption E2, for any 𝜁 ∈ ( 0, 1),Pr ©«

|𝑆 + 

> 𝑆

| > ¯𝑐 𝜖 𝑁 +√︄ 𝑁 

2 log 

 1

𝜁 

ª®¬

≤ 𝜁 . 

Theorem E.1 (Finite-sample dynamic regret bound). Under Assumptions (E1)–(E4), assume J𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) ≠

∅ and 𝛼 < 1. For any 𝜉 ∈ ( 0, 1), with probability at least 1 − 𝜉 ,

𝑅 dyn  

> 𝑞

(𝑇 ) ≤ 𝑁 ℎ+ ¯𝑐 𝜖 𝑁 +√︄ 𝑁 

2 log 

 3

𝜉 



+2|𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 |√︄ log (6𝐾 𝑁 /𝜉 )

2𝑛 min 

+2𝑀 (𝑚 )+ 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 )+ 𝜂 (𝐾 −1)| 𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 |+ 2𝛿 sm 

𝑛 min 

|𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 |+ 𝐹 𝑞 (𝑇 ; ℎ, 𝑚 ).

Proof. The first 𝑁 ℎ searches do not yet have a full ℎ-time lookback window; since per-search regret is at most one, their contribution is at most 𝑁 ℎ. On any post-warm-up static round, regret is also at most one, so the total static-round regret is at most |𝑆 + 

> 𝑆

|. Lemma E.2 with 𝜁 = 𝜉 /3 gives the event 

Estat :=



|𝑆 + 

> 𝑆

| ≤ ¯𝑐 𝜖 𝑁 +√︄ 𝑁 

2 log 

 3

𝜉 

  

,

with probability at least 1 − 𝜉 /3. Now fix a greedy LAAL round 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 . Define regularized means 𝑔 𝑖, 𝑗 := 𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − 𝜂𝑖 and b𝑔 𝑖, 𝑗 := b𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − 𝜂𝑖 .Greedy selection implies 

𝜇 𝑖 ★𝑗 , 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑎 𝑗 , 𝑗 ≤ 2 max  

> 𝑖 ∈ A

|b𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 | + 𝜂 (𝐾 − 1).

To bound the estimation error, define 

b𝜇 0 

> 𝑖, 𝑗

:= 1

𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 ∑︁ ℓ ∈𝑊 𝑗 (ℎ)

˜𝑟 ℓ 1{𝑎 ℓ = 𝑖 }, ¯𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 := 1

𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 ∑︁ ℓ ∈𝑊 𝑗 (ℎ)

𝜇 𝑖,ℓ 1{𝑎 ℓ = 𝑖 }.

Then 

|b𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 | ≤ | b𝜇 0 

> 𝑖, 𝑗

− ¯𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 | + | ¯𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 | + | b𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − b𝜇 0 

> 𝑖, 𝑗

|.

On Esupp , 𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 ≥ 𝑛 min . By (E3) and Hoeffding–Azuma, choosing 

𝛽 :=√︄ log (6𝐾 𝑁 /𝜉 )

2𝑛 min 

and applying a union bound over 𝑖 ∈ A and 𝑗 ∈ J 𝐺 (ℎ, 𝑚 ) gives a noise event Enoise , with probability at least 1 − 𝜉 /3, on which max  

> 𝑖, 𝑗

|b𝜇 0 

> 𝑖, 𝑗

− ¯𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 | ≤ 𝛽. 

Since ˜ 𝑟 𝑗 ∈ [ 0, 1], the smoothing term is bounded by 

|b𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − b𝜇 0 

> 𝑖, 𝑗

| ≤ 𝛿 sm 

𝑛 𝑖, 𝑗 

≤ 𝛿 sm 

𝑛 min 

.

ix For the drift term, let 𝑣 𝑟 := max 𝑖 ∈ A |𝜇 𝑖,𝑟 − 𝜇 𝑖,𝑟 −1 | and 𝐵 𝑗 := Í 𝑗 𝑟 =𝑏 𝑗 +1 𝑣 𝑟 . Then | ¯𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑖, 𝑗 | ≤ 𝐵 𝑗 , and ∑︁  

> 𝑗 ∈𝑆 𝐺 𝐿

𝐵 𝑗 ≤ 𝑀 (𝑚 )+ 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 ),

because each variation increment appears in at most 𝑀 (𝑚 )+ greedy-eligible windows. On Esupp ∩ E noise ∩ E stat , which has probability at least 1 − 𝜉 , every greedy LAAL round satisfies 

𝜇 𝑖 ★𝑗 , 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑎 𝑗 , 𝑗 ≤ 2𝛽 + 2𝐵 𝑗 + 2𝛿 sm 

𝑛 min 

+ 𝜂 (𝐾 − 1).

Summing over 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 gives ∑︁  

> 𝑗 ∈𝑆 𝐺 𝐿

(𝜇 𝑖 ★𝑗 , 𝑗 − 𝜇 𝑎 𝑗 , 𝑗 ) ≤ 2|𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 |𝛽 + 2𝑀 (𝑚 )+ 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 ) + 𝜂 (𝐾 − 1)| 𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 | + 2𝛿 sm 

𝑛 min 

|𝑆 𝐺 𝐿 |.

Fallback rounds contribute at most |𝑆 𝐹 𝐿 | = 𝐹 𝑞 (𝑇 ; ℎ, 𝑚 ). Adding the warm-up, static, greedy-LAAL, and fallback contributions proves the theorem. □

Assumption E5 (Regular query rate). For the tuning results, assume there exist constants 0 < 𝜅 − ≤ 𝜅 + < ∞

such that 

𝜅 −

𝑁 ℎ 𝑇 ≤ 𝑀 𝑗 ≤ 𝜅 +

𝑁 ℎ 𝑇 , ∀ 𝑗 ∈ { 𝐽 ℎ, . . . , 𝑁 }, 𝑁 ℎ ≤ 𝜅 +

𝑁 ℎ 𝑇 .

This formalizes the statement that an ℎ-time window contains on the order of 𝑁 ℎ /𝑇 searches of query 𝑞 .

Corollary E.1 (Fixed exploration mass). Under Assumption E5, ignoring logarithmic factors and lower-order warm-up, smoothing, regularization, and fallback terms, and taking 𝑚 = 0, Theorem E.1 gives the dominant scaling 

𝑅 dyn  

> 𝑞

(𝑇 ) ≲ ¯𝑐 𝜖 𝑁 +√︄ 𝑁𝑇 𝑐 𝑤 min ℎ + 𝑁 ℎ 𝑇 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 ).

For fixed 𝜖 , choosing 

ℎ★ ≍

 𝑇 3

𝑐 𝑤 min 𝑁 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 )2

1/3

yields 

𝑅 dyn  

> 𝑞

(𝑇 ) = 𝑂 ( ¯𝑐 𝜖 𝑁 ) + ˜𝑂 



(𝑐 𝑤 min )−1/3 𝑁 2/3𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 )1/3

.

If 𝑁 = Θ (𝑇 ), this becomes 

𝑅 dyn  

> 𝑞

(𝑇 ) = 𝑂 ( ¯𝑐 𝜖𝑇 ) + ˜𝑂 



(𝑐 𝑤 min )−1/3𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 )1/3𝑇 2/3

.

Corollary E.2 (Joint tuning under equal static shares). Under the same simplifications as Corollary E.1, suppose the 𝐾 static cohorts receive equal design mass, 𝑤 𝑖 = 𝜖 /𝐾 for 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝐾 . The dominant terms xbecome 

𝑅 dyn  

> 𝑞

(𝑇 ) ≲ ¯𝑐 𝜖 𝑁 +√︄ 𝐾 𝑁𝑇 𝑐 𝜖 ℎ + 𝑁 ℎ 𝑇 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 ).

For fixed 𝜖 , the optimal window length is 

ℎ★(𝜖 ) ≍ 

 𝐾𝑇 3

𝑐 𝜖 𝑁 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 )2

1/3

.

Substituting this back and optimizing over 𝜖 gives 

𝜖 ★ ≍ ¯𝑐 −3/4𝑐 −1/4

 𝐾 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 )

𝑁 

1/4

,

and therefore 

𝑅 dyn  

> 𝑞

(𝑇 ) = ˜𝑂 



¯𝑐 1/4𝑐 −1/4 𝑁 3/4  𝐾 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 )1/4

.

If 𝑁 = Θ (𝑇 ), this becomes 

𝑅 dyn  

> 𝑞

(𝑇 ) = ˜𝑂 



¯𝑐 1/4𝑐 −1/4𝑇 3/4  𝐾 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 )1/4

,

which is the bound stated in Theorem 1 after writing 𝑉 (𝑇 ) ≡ 𝑉 𝑞 (𝑇 ).

G Low Volume Queries 

Default ad load for sparse queries ( 𝑖 def ): LAAL applies greedy selection only when a query has at least 𝑚 

recent observations in the sliding window; otherwise it falls back to a fixed default 𝑖 def . We choose 𝑖 def using historical data from the static cohorts {𝐶, 𝑇 2, . . . , 𝑇 6} during the last month of the first experiment. Let S𝐻 denote the historical sample of searches from the static cohorts (so each 𝑠 ∈ S 𝐻 has a fixed realized ad load 𝑎 𝑠 ∈ { 1, . . . , 6} determined by its cohort). Using the same window length ℎ as in deployment, define the trailing-window volume for search 𝑠 as the number of searches for the same query in the preceding ℎ days: 

𝑁 𝑠 ≡∑︁  

> 𝑠 ′∈ S 𝐻

1{𝑞 𝑠 ′ = 𝑞 𝑠 } 1{𝑡 𝑠 − ℎ ≤ 𝑡 𝑠 ′ < 𝑡 𝑠 }.

Let 𝜖 denote the aggregate traffic share assigned to these static cohorts. We label a search as low-volume if its full-traffic-equivalent trailing-window volume is at most the greedy threshold 𝑚 :

SLow ≡ { 𝑠 ∈ S 𝐻 : 𝑁 𝑠 /𝜖 ≤ 𝑚 }.

We then choose 𝑖 def as the best-performing uniform ad-load policy on this low-volume subset, under the deployed reward 𝑟 (𝑦 𝑠 , 𝜆 ) = 𝜆 Revenue 𝑠 + Conversion 𝑠 . Specifically, for each 𝑖 ∈ { 1, . . . , 6} define the mean reward among low-volume searches that were served with ad load 𝑖 :

b𝑟 Low (𝑖 ) ≡ E[𝑟 (𝑦 𝑠 , 𝜆 ) | 𝑠 ∈ S Low , 𝑎 𝑠 = 𝑖 ] ≈

Í𝑠 ∈ S Low 1{𝑎 𝑠 = 𝑖 } 𝑟 (𝑦 𝑠 , 𝜆 )

Í𝑠 ∈ S Low 1{𝑎 𝑠 = 𝑖 } .

xi Finally, we set 

𝑖 def ∈ arg max  

> 𝑖 ∈ { 1,..., 6}

b𝑟 Low (𝑖 ).

In our historical data, this maximizer is 𝑖 def = 4. Intuitively, 𝑖 def is the best uniform static policy when the query is sparse in the recent window (i.e., when LAAL cannot reliably estimate per-query arm values). Table A7: Low-Volume Queries: Outcomes by Conditions 

𝐶 𝑇 2 𝑇 3 𝑇 4 𝑇 5 𝑇 6

Search Count 1,787,515 354,797 335,833 338,457 334,132 336,299 Conversion/Search 0.479 0.470 0.489 0.485 0.475 0.466 Revenue/Search 4.03 4.37 4.75 5.15 5.52 5.99 Reward/Search 0.519 0.514 0.536 0.537 0.531 0.526 

H Reweighting Brand-On and Brand-Off Recommendation Histograms 

For each non-stationary query 𝑞 , let 𝑑 𝑞  

> on ,𝑖

and 𝑑 𝑞  

> off ,𝑖

denote the number of LAAL searches in which ad load 𝑖 

was recommended during Brand-On and Brand-Off states, respectively. Let 𝐷 𝑞  

> on

= Í𝑖 𝑑 𝑞  

> on ,𝑖

, 𝐷 𝑞  

> off

= Í𝑖 𝑑 𝑞  

> off ,𝑖

,and 𝑝 𝑞  

> on

= 𝐷 𝑞 

> on

/( 𝐷 𝑞  

> on

+ 𝐷 𝑞  

> off

). To compare Brand-On and Brand-Off recommendation distributions while accounting for different Brand-On shares across queries, we reweight counts within query as ˜𝑑 𝑞  

> on ,𝑖

= 𝑑 𝑞  

> on ,𝑖

/𝑝 𝑞 

> on

and ˜𝑑 𝑞  

> off ,𝑖

= 𝑑 𝑞  

> off ,𝑖

/( 1 − 𝑝 𝑞 

> on

). We then aggregate ˜𝑑 on ,𝑖 = Í𝑞 ∈ Q NS 

˜𝑑 𝑞  

> on ,𝑖

and ˜𝑑 off ,𝑖 = Í𝑞 ∈ Q NS 

˜𝑑 𝑞  

> off ,𝑖

, and normalize each vector to sum to one. xii References