Overcoming Challenges of Interpretive Structural Modeling
with Large Language Models
Everett Rush1,2
, David J. Icove1
, Ari Kim2
, Byung H. Park2
, and
Michael A. Langston1
1Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN
{langston, icove}@tennessee.edu
2 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN
{rushen, parkbh, kima}@ornl.gov
Abstract. Interpretive Structural Modeling (ISM) is a well-known process for multi-criteria
decision making. The success of ISM over other methodologies is its ability to model causal
relationships, the binary scale of factors, and resulting hierarchical representation. Tradition-
ally, the modeling process is performed by repeated interactions with subject matter experts
until consensus is reached. This process is tedious, labor-intense, and most importantly lim-
its the ability of ISM to scale to studies with hundreds of variables. Drawing on existing
work of causal graph discovery with large language models (LLM) as imperfect experts, this
work explores an integrated LLM-ISM approach for ISM. Pairwise, k-wise, rowwise, and full
graph discovery methodologies are compared and evaluated. It is shown that causal graph
discovery methods for ISM perform best using rowwise (SHD=160, F1-score=0.77) and full
graph methods (SHD=135, F1-score=0.73).
Keywords: Interpretive Structural Modeling, ISM, Causal Graphs, Generative AI, GenAI,
Large Language Models, LLM
1
Introduction
Interpretive Structural modeling (ISM) is an important multi-criteria decision making tech-
nique developed by Warfield [1]. ISM has been successfully applied to thousands of problems
in supply chain, logistics, sustainability, business research, and engineering [2]. The ISM pro-
cess iteratively organizes mental models into hierarchical models useful for theory building.
The success of ISM over other methodologies is the ability to model causal relationships,
the binary scale of factors, and the resulting hierarchical representation.
Traditionally, the modeling step in the ISM process is performed by repeated interac-
tions with subject matter experts (SME) until consensus is reached. This process is labor
arXiv:2610.02254v1  [cs.LG]  30 Sep 2026


intensive, error-prone, and limits the ability of ISM to scale beyond a small number of
factors. Most ISM studies range from 5 to 32 factors where SMEs are responsible for anno-
tating all pairwise interactions between factors [3]. It is also common for an SME to perform
multiple rounds of annotations to resolve biases [4].
The ISM process is appropriate for modeling activities when there is minimal knowledge
or data on the pairwise connections between factors [2]. Consequently, the process relies
heavily on SMEs rather than statistical causal inference and numerical observations. Recent
studies have shown great success incorporating large language models (LLMs) with causal
inference frameworks [5, 6, 7]. The general knowledge from LLMs is used to guide causal
algorithms. Despite these advances, there is no comprehensive study on the use of LLMs in
the ISM process.
Recent studies estimate that between 47% and 56% of all worker tasks can be com-
pleted significantly faster and at the same level of quality given the proper tooling [8]. Based
on the success of LLMs in causal graph discovery and rich general knowledge that LLMs
bring, this paper describes an integrated approach for the use of LLMs in the ISM pro-
cess. This tool is made publicly available on Github ( https://github.com/rusheniii/LLM-
InterpretiveStructuralModeling ).
2
Background
While LLMs have been used extensively in causal graph discovery, LLMs are just now
starting to be used for ISM [9]. This section describes the ISM process and LLM methods
for causal graph discovery. The entire ISM process is presented followed by current methods
in causal graph discovery with LLMs.
2.1
Interpretive Structural Modeling
The theory development process requires answering what factors are involved in the phe-
nomenon of interest, how the factors are related, and why the relation exists [10]. Often
causality is a key component of theory building. The ISM is a process that answers the
"what" and "how" of theory building.
The ISM framework has three phases: preparation, operation, and post-operation.
ISM starts with identification of a problem and definition of key factors to consider. Then a
contextual relation is chosen. Next, the structural self-interaction matrix (SSIM) is formed
by pairwise comparison of one factor against another. The transitive closure of the SSIM is
computed, the factors are partitioned into levels, and the final model is extracted. Formally,
we define the transitive closure A∗of the adjacency matrix A as
A∗= (A + I)n+1 = (A + I)n̸ = (A + I)n−1
(1)


using Boolean algebra operations. We use an implementation of the Floyd-Warshall algo-
rithm to find the transitive closure rather than matrix operations [11].
Traditionally, the SSIM is constructed using literature reviews, SMEs, or surveys. This
step is normally treated as a data collection process that can be costly and time consuming
especially when SMEs or surveys are involved. Recent methods have sought to use BERT
with convolutional neural networks (Bert-RCNN) to create the SSIM matrix [9]. The Bert-
RCNN model is not included in this study as the model is not publicly available and no
comparisons were made to other methods.
2.2
Causal Graph Discovery
The use of LLMS in causal graph discovery has attracted attention of researchers in re-
cent years [12, 7, 6]. In casual graphs, variables are represented as the node set, and causal
relationships between variables represent the edge set. Some authors enforce an acyclic con-
straint on the directed graph and define casual graphs as directed acyclic graphs. However,
the more general definition allows for interaction between variables. The ISM methodology
uses the more general definition of causal graphs and allows for cycles. LLMs have been
shown to be effective in discovering the causal graph for a specified set of variables.
Definition 1. A causal graph G is a directed graph consisting of variables X = {X1, ..., Xn}
and a set of edges E. A directed edge Xi →Xj ∈E denotes a direct causal influence of Xi on
Xj with respect to X1, ..., Xn. Let the descendants of Xi be de(Xi) = {Xk|Xi →... →Xk}.
Let the children of Xi be ch(Xi) = {Xk|Xi →Xk}.
Note that this definition allows for cycles. For example, consider the cyclic relationship
between increasing temperature and the amount of sea ice [13].
There are a number of proposed approaches for discovering causal graphs using LLMs.
There is the full graph discovery method that attempts to discover the entire graph in a
single LLM inference step. There is rowwise prompting that uses a single prompt that asks
the LLM to determine n−1 number of relationships against one variable in a single prompt.
There is also k-wise prompting that determines k relationships against one variable in a
single prompt. Finally, there is pairwise prompting that asks the LLM to determine the
relationship between a single pair of variables at a time. These methods are depicted in
Figure 1 for a 12x12 adjacency matrix.
One challenge in causal graph discovery is managing indirect causal relationships. For
example consider causal graph G(X, E), factor x ∈X may influence another factor y ∈X
via an intermediate variable z ∈X. Then (x, z) ∈E, (z, y) ∈E and (x, y) /∈E. If the
variable z /∈X, then the edge (x, y) would be in the edge set. It is useful to define a perfect
expert that has access to the true causal graph and can perfectly answer pairwise queries
provided an auxiliary set of variables.


Rowwise
(k=n-1)
Full Graph
Causal Graph Discovery LLM Prompting Methods
Pairwise
(k=1)
K-wise
(k=4)
Fig. 1: Prompting methods for causal graph discovery in a single prompt. Pairwise (k=1) prompt-
ing considers only two variables at once (left). As k increases, the number of variables compared
in a single prompt increases up to the entire row (k=n-1). Full graph prompting tries to discover
the entire graph in a single prompt (right).
Definition 2. Let G(X, E) be a causal graph. Given Xi, Xj, and a set of auxiliary nodes
Oij ⊆X, a perfect expert has access to graph G and responds with true to "does Xi cause
Xj" if Xj ∈ch(Xi) or if a direct path exists from Xi to Xj such that it does not contain
any node in Oij.
In Vashitha, et al., it is shown that the graph discovered by questioning a perfect expert
can fail to find the true causal graph if the set of auxiliary nodes is empty [7]. Stating this
fact formally:
Proposition 1. Let G be the true causal graph and ˆG be the causal graph obtained from a
perfect expert when Oij = ∅∀i, j . The structural hamming distance (SHD) is shown to be
SHD(G, ˆG) = P|X|
i=1 |de(Xi)| −|ch(Xi)|.
3
Methods
Our method diverges from existing techniques by (1) using a more general definition of
causal graphs that includes cycles, (2) discovers SSIM ∗rather than the SSIM directly,
and optionally (3) proposes an extension using retrieval augmented generation (RAG) to
provide in-context learning to the LLM.
Our approach directly discovers the transitive closure of the SSIM because all the anal-
ysis steps are done on the transitive closure of the SSIM. SSIM is just an intermediate artifact
in the ISM process. Additionally, Proposition 1 shows that there is an inherent penalty on
graph discovery based on auxiliary factors when using SSIM directly. The transitive closure
removes this penalty and allows for a better benchmark of the resulting structural models


as a perfect expert can discover the transitive closure with any subset of variables. This is
expressed formally in Proposition 2.
Proposition 2. Let G∗be the transitive closure of the causal graph G. Let ˆG be the causal
graph generated by a perfect expert when Oij ⊆X \ {Xi, Xj} ∀i, j. Then G∗= ˆG∗.
Proof. Proof by contradiction. ( =⇒) Assume there is an edge (u, v) ∈ˆG∗and (u, v) /∈G∗.
By the definition of ˆG, the existence of P(u, v) in ˆG means that P(u, v) exists in G. Then
(u, v) ∈G∗a contradiction.
( ⇐= ) Assume there is an edge (u, v) ∈G∗and (u, v) /∈ˆG∗. Then P(u, v) exists in G.
By the definition of ˆG, all of the edges in G are also in ˆG. Then P(u, v) exists in ˆG and
(u, v) ∈ˆG∗a contradiction.
The main method of the LLM-ISM approach is Algorithm 1 the iterative construction
of SSIM∗. The input is a set of variables X, an integer k specifying the number of variables
to consider in a single LLM query, and a research question. The graph ˆG is initialized as
an empty digraph. For each variable i under consideration, the LLM will predict the causal
edges from i to the target variable. When k = 1, the algorithm operates in pairwise mode
and the LLM expert is responsible for determining whether a single edge exists in ˆG. This
results in O(n2) queries to the LLM expert. When k = n, the algorithm provides a variable
i to the LLM and asks the LLM expert to determine whether n edges exist in ˆG with a
single inference request to the LLM. This results in O(n) queries to the LLM expert.
The LLM expert is provided the research question, a variable under consideration, and
a list of variables for analysis. The LLM is instructed that it is performing a task for ISM and
that it should assume the persona of an expert in qualitative systems analysis. The task to
perform is to determine whether the provided variable influences any of the other variables
in the variable list. The LLM should for each variable in the variables list, perform a pairwise
comparison with the provided factor to determine the directional relationship between the
two factors. Any of the other variables in the list should be used for context. Each variable
in the variable list should have an entry in the output list. The LLM should respond with
"V" if the provided variable directly or indirectly influences the output variable. The LLM
should respond with "O" if there is no influence or insufficient evidence of a directional
influence. The LLM is advised that false positive relationships are worse than missing weak
relationships. The full prompt is provided in the Appendix.
3.1
Incorporating SME Knowledge
Rather than rely on the LLM’s general knowledge, we extend the main approach in Algo-
rithm 2 to allow for in-context learning. An additional argument is added to allow passing
documents to the algorithm. The documents are all converted to text using Docling [14].


Algorithm 1 Iteratively Construct SSIM ∗
1: procedure constructSsimStar(X, k, research_question)
2:
ˆG ←{}
3:
for i ∈X do
4:
batchedFactors ←batch(X −{x}, k)
5:
for factorList ∈batchedFactors do
6:
predictedEdges ←queryLlmExpert(research_question, i, factorList)
7:
for (u, v) ∈predictedEdges do
8:
ˆG.add((u, v))
9:
end for
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
ˆG∗←transitiveClosure( ˆG)
13:
return ˆG∗
14: end procedure
The most relevant text chunks are retrieved using a query vector created from the research
question and factors under consideration. The chunks are stored and passed in the LLM
query.
3.2
Experimental Setup
This study evaluates the benchmark against three models: GPT-5.2, GPT-OSS 120B, and
Nemotron Super 3 [15, 16, 17]. The hardware setup is an enterprise server with 8 H100
Nvidia GPUs. The models are all served via the OpenAI Responses API. The models for
GPT-OSS 120B and Nemotron 3 Super were full floating point 8 rather than the quantized
version of the models.
3.3
Data Collection
The benchmark dataset consists of 9 peer-reviewed publications that reported the results
of the ISM process and did not rely solely on interviews or surveys [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25, 26]. The factors table and final reachability matrices were extracted and stored for
evaluation.
4
Results
This section presents the results of each methodology in discovering the ISM final reachabil-
ity graph. The evaluation datasets are described by the number of nodes and edges. Since


Algorithm 2 Iteratively Construct SSIM ∗With RAG
1: procedure constructSsimStarWithRag(X, k, documents, research_question)
2:
ˆG ←{}
3:
for i ∈X do
4:
batchedFactors ←batch(X −{x}, k)
5:
for factorList ∈batchedFactors do
6:
textChunks ←[]
7:
for j ∈factorList do
8:
queryV ector ←embed(researchquestion, i, j)
9:
textChunks.add(topTextChunks(queryV ector, documents))
10:
end for
11:
predictedEdges ←queryLlmExpert(research_question, i, factorList, textChunks)
12:
for (u, v) ∈predictedEdges do
13:
ˆG.add((u, v))
14:
end for
15:
end for
16:
end for
17:
ˆG∗←transitiveClosure( ˆG)
18:
return ˆG∗
19: end procedure
this study is inference only, we consider the dataset as test only and directly provide SHD
and F1-score metrics.
4.1
Graph Statistics
A summary view of the 9 studies used in this evaluation are in Table 1. The 9 graphs are
small with number of nodes ranging from 7 to 17 and edge density between 0.31 and 0.57.
The fruitAndVegetables study is smallest with only 7 nodes and 17 edges. The i4t study is
largest with 17 nodes and 115 edges. The average number of nodes is 11.7 nodes and average
edges is 55.4. Graphs of this size are typical in ISM studies [3].
4.2
Methodology Evaluation
Table 2 shows the results of running three models against the benchmark dataset. The best
score for metric is in bold for each model. Given a specific value of k and LLM model, the
total SHD was calculated by summing the SHD from each study. The SHD for a study was
calculated using SHD(G∗, ˆG∗) where G is the published SSIM and ˆG is the graph output


Study
Nodes Edges Density
i4t
17
115
.40
smartOrganizations
10
57
.57
automationRobots
8
30
.47
constructionWorkers
13
55
.33
socialMedia
15
69
.31
genAIInHigherEducation
9
37
.46
circularEconomy
13
54
.32
fruitAndVegetables
7
17
.35
truckDriverShortage
13
65
.38
Table 1: ISM Graph Statistics
from the LLM. The true positives, false positives, and false negatives were summated across
all studies to calculate the F1-score.
GPT-5.2 outperforms the other models both in terms of F1-score and SHD. The highest
F1-scores were from GPT-5.2 using rowwise comparison. GPT-5.2 rowwise achieved F1-score
of 0.77 using the RAG approach. The lowest SHD scores were obtained with GPT-OSS-120B
using the full graph approach. GPT-OSS-120B full graph achieved 135 SHD using the RAG
approach. All models performed better as the number of comparisons in a single prompt
increased.
Batch Size
GPT-5.2
Nemotron 3
GPT-OSS-120B
SHD ↓
F1-Score ↑
SHD ↓
F1-Score ↑
SHD ↓
F1-Score ↑
Pairwise (1)
170
0.75
190
0.73
180
0.74
2
185
0.74
180
0.73
195
0.72
4
174
0.74
175
0.74
195
0.72
Rowwise (n)
160
0.77
180
0.73
165
0.75
Full Graph
164
0.73
175
0.75
135
0.73
Table 2: Comparison of Causal Graph Methods
5
Conclusion
Despite advances in causal graph research using LLMs, LLMs have not been widely adopted
in ISM processes. This paper proposes an integrated LLM-ISM approach and explores the
suitability of incorporating LLMS into the ISM process. This approach shows that ISM


is a suitable application for LLMs to aid in SSIM discovery. We benchmarked pairwise,
k-wise, rowwise, and full graph prompting methods against a new ISM benchmark. SHD
and F1-Score are presented for GPT-5.2, Nemotron 3 Super, and GPT-OSS-120B. GPT-5.2
outperformed both Nemotron 3 Super and GPT-OSS-120B. Across all models, the causal
graph discovery methods for ISM perform best using rowwise and full graph methods.
5.1
Future Work
This methodology can scale well to studies with more variables than traditional ISM studies.
A future work is to apply this methodology to Posttramautic Stress Disorder (PTSD) care.
The modeling activity is to find the hierarchical relationships between barriers and enablers
during treatment and recovery of individuals with PTSD. Rather than rolling variables
up into high level concepts, the proposed methodology can examine all the variables at a
detailed and granular level.
Another interesting topic for future investigation is the application of this integrated
LLM-ISM technique to agentic workflows. Agents powered by LLMs will have the potential
to use ISM graphs as in-context learning during planning or execution to make better and
more deterministic decisions. Beyond using the ISM graphs for in-context learning, the
graphs may also be incorporated into the training phase of the LLMs themselves to ensure
causal inference is learned.
6
Acknowledgments
This research used resources of the Infrastructure for Science, AI, And Computing (ISAAC)
AI-as-a-Service System at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is supported by the Of-
fice of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725.


Bibliography
[1] Warfield JN. Developing Interconnection Matrices in Structural Modeling. IEEE trans-
actions on systems, man, and cybernetics. 1974;SMC-4(1):81-7.
[2] Sorooshian S, Tavana M, Ribeiro-Navarrete S. From classical interpretive structural
modeling to total interpretive structural modeling and beyond: A half-century of busi-
ness research. Journal of business research. 2023;157:113642.
[3] Ahmad N, Qahmash A. SmartISM: Implementation and Assessment of Interpretive
Structural Modeling. Sustainability. 2021;13(16). Available from: https://www.mdpi.
com/2071-1050/13/16/8801.
[4] Sushil. How to check correctness of total interpretive structural models? Annals of
operations research. 2018;270(1-2):473-87.
[5] Peng B, Chen S, Xu L, Lu C. CauScientist: Teaching LLMs to Respect Data for Causal
Discovery. arXivorg. 2026.
[6] Ban T, Chen L, Wang X, Chen H. From Query Tools to Causal Architects: Harnessing
Large Language Models for Advanced Causal Discovery from Data. arXivorg. 2023.
[7] Vashishtha A, Reddy AG, Kumar A, Bachu S, Balasubramanian VN, Sharma A. Causal
Order: The Key to Leveraging Imperfect Experts in Causal Inference. In: The Thir-
teenth International Conference on Learning Representations; 2025. Available from:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=9juyeCqL0u.
[8] Eloundou T, Manning S, Mishkin P, Rock D. GPTs are GPTs: An Early Look at the
Labor Market Impact Potential of Large Language Models. arXivorg. 2023.
[9] Liu X, Li MY, Yuan DN. Analyzing consumer satisfaction using Interpretive Struc-
tural Modeling driven by online reviews: An integrated approach. Journal of business
research. 2026;205:115908.
[10] Whetten DA. What Constitutes a Theoretical Contribution? The Academy of Man-
agement review. 1989;14(4):490.
[11] Floyd RW. Algorithm 97: Shortest path. New York, NY, USA: ACM; 1962.
[12] Chen EYJ, Shen Y, Choi A, Darwiche A. Learning Bayesian networks with ancestral
constraints. In: Lee D, Sugiyama M, Luxburg U, Guyon I, Garnett R, editors. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. vol. 29. Curran Associates, Inc.; 2016. .


[13] Mooij JM, Peters J, Janzing D, Zscheischler J, Schölkopf B. Distinguishing cause from
effect using observational data: methods and benchmarks. J Mach Learn Res. 2016
Jan;17(1):1103–1204.
[14] Livathinos N, Auer C, Lysak M, Nassar A, Dolfi M, Vagenas P, et al.. Docling: An
Efficient Open-Source Toolkit for AI-driven Document Conversion; 2025.
Available
from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17887.
[15] Singh A, Fry A, Perelman A, Tart A, Ganesh A, El-Kishky A, et al.. OpenAI GPT-5
System Card; 2026. Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03267.
[16] OpenAI, :, Agarwal S, Ahmad L, Ai J, Altman S, et al.. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b
Model Card; 2025. Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10925.
[17] NVIDIA, :, Blakeman A, Grattafiori A, Basant A, Gupta A, et al.. NVIDIA Nemotron
3: Efficient and Open Intelligence; 2025.
Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2512.20856.
[18] Mishra AA, Pathak DK. Industry 4.0 Technologies Adoption and Sustainability Integra-
tion in Human Resource Management: An Analysis Using Extended TOE Framework
and TISM. IEEE transactions on engineering management. 2024;71:14688-703.
[19] Khan U, Haleem A. Improving to Smart Organization: An integrated ISM and fuzzy-
MICMAC modelling of barriers. Journal of manufacturing technology management.
2015;26(6):807-29.
[20] Onososen A, Musonda I. Collaboration in Constructing Human–Robot Teams: Inter-
pretive Structural Modelling (ISM) Approach to Identifying Barriers and Strategies for
Enhancing Implementation. Automation (Basel). 2026;7(1):28.
[21] Wijewickrama MKCS, Tennakoon GA, Samaraweera A, Chileshe N. Modeling Psy-
chosocial Hazards Affecting Professional Construction Employees: ISM-MICMAC Ap-
proach. Journal of construction engineering and management. 2026;152(3).
[22] Wen J, Wang H, Chen H.
Research on the formation mechanism of social media
burnout among college students based on the ISM-MICMAC model. Scientific reports.
2026;16(1):12554.
[23] Hughes L, Malik T, Dettmer S, Al-Busaidi AS, Dwivedi YK.
Reimagining Higher
Education: Navigating the Challenges of Generative AI Adoption. Information systems
frontiers. 2025.
[24] K VKE, K S, Kandasamy J, Venkat V, Mani RS. Barriers to the adoption of dig-
ital technologies in a functional circular economy network. Operations management
research. 2023;16(3):1541-61.


[25] dos Santos Silva J, Matos de Oliveira A, Veríssimo de Oliveira J, Bouzon M. Barriers
to digital transformation in fruit and vegetable supply chains: a multicriteria analysis
using ISM and MICMAC. Opsearch. 2025;62(1):460-82.
[26] Akenroye T, Bernard Bracy J, Olunde S. Rethinking the U.S. Truck Driver Shortage:
A Structural Analysis of Root Causes and Their Interdependencies; 2026. Available
from: https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=6795011.
