Title: Stable Matching with Peer-Dependent Preferences: Existence and Cutoff Characterization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.18381v1

Published Time: Thu, 20 Aug 2026 00:16:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
# Stable Matching with Peer-Dependent Preferences: Existence and Cutoff Characterization 

## Jacob D. Leshno ∗

## August 20, 2026 

Abstract 

This paper presents a framework for stable matching markets that accommo-dates the peer-dependent preferences employed in empirical work. We show the existence of a stable matching in a continuum economy and of an approximately stable matching in a large finite sampled economy under assumptions satisfied by standard empirical specifications. The analysis builds on a tractable characteriza-tion of stable matchings with peer-dependent preferences in terms of supply and demand equations along with a rational-expectations condition. 

> ∗

University of Chicago Booth School of Business, jacob.leshno@ChicagoBooth.edu . I thank Clau-dia Allende, Eduardo Azevedo, Guilherme Carmona, Chris Campos, Yeon-Koo Che, John Hatfield, Adam Kapor, Krittanai Laohakunakorn, Jack Mountjoy, Bobby Pakzad-Hurson, and Alvin Roth for helpful comments and discussions. I thank Anand Shah for research support. This work is supported by the Robert H. Topel Faculty Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. 

1arXiv:2608.18381v1 [econ.TH] 18 Aug 2026 1 Introduction   

> “There is a collective action issue . . . there’s no French teacher for one student. But there’s a program if 15 come, if 20 come. But we all have to, then, take one step forward at exactly the same time.” – Nice White Parents 1

Motivated by evidence that peer composition affects students’ preferences over schools (Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Pathak, Schellenberg, and Walters, 2020; Rothstein, 2006; Beuermann, Jackson, Navarro-Sola, and Pardo, 2023), empirical work on school choice increasingly incorporates peer-dependent preferences (Epple, Jha, and Sieg, 2018; Allende, 2021; Campos, 2024). Similar peer-dependent preferences arise in urban models of location sorting with endogenous amenities (Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan, 2007; Diamond, 2016; Almagro and Dom´ ınguez-Iino, 2025), as well as in models of worker–firm sort-ing with endogenous firm productivity (Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis, 1999; Bender, Bloom, Card, Van Reenen, and Wolter, 2018). Matching theory has played a central role in the design and empirical analysis of school choice programs (Abdulkadiro˘ glu and S¨ onmez, 2003; Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Pathak, and Roth, 2005; Agarwal and Somaini, 2020), and a substantial theoretical literature has studied matching in the presence of peer effects and other externalities. 2 However, a central difficulty is that a stable matching may fail to exist under peer-dependent pref-erences. Such nonexistence may arise from two different sources. In some environments, nonexistence reflects a fundamental economic challenge that persists even in large mar-kets. In others, nonexistence is only due to indivisibilities, and approximate solutions exist in sufficiently large markets. This distinction matters for empirical work that re-quires an equilibrium concept to deliver predictions in counterfactual environments. If nonexistence is driven only by such “rounding errors,” then approximate stability may be an empirically relevant solution concept. We extend the continuum supply-and-demand framework of Azevedo and Leshno (2016) to study stable matchings with peer-dependent preferences. This approach has three advantages. First, it allows us to abstract from indivisibilities, and therefore dis-tinguish failures of stability that reflect fundamental economic forces from those that arise only from finite-market “rounding errors” caused by indivisibilities. Second, it 

> 1Excerpt from episode 1 of the podcast Nice White Parents by Serial and The New York Times (Joffe-Walt, 2020).
> 2See the literature review below for a detailed discussion.

2retains the capacity constraints, priorities, and peer-dependent preferences that are cen-tral to empirical applications. Third, the supply-and-demand representation describes each student’s choice as demand for her most preferred school among those for which she meets the admission cutoff. This formulation maps naturally into the discrete-choice models commonly used in empirical analyses of school choice. In the model, student preferences over schools may flexibly depend on matching statistics , which summarize the characteristics of students assigned to each school. These statistics can capture the types of peer characteristics commonly used in empirical work. For example, a student’s preferences may depend on the average GPA of students as-signed to a school, the gender composition of the school or neighboring schools, or whether sufficiently many students enroll to support a specialized language program. Preferences can be arbitrary functions of these matching statistics, allowing peer com-position to affect preferences in general and even discontinuous ways. The implied restriction is that preferences depend on peers through summary characteristics of the assignment rather than through the identities of particular students. 3

The standard notion of stability extends naturally to this environment: a matching is stable if there is no student–school pair such that the school is willing to admit the student and, given the matching statistics generated by the assignment, the student prefers that school to her assigned school. We extend the Azevedo and Leshno (2016) cutoff characterization and show that stable matchings are equivalent to cutoff–statistics pairs that satisfy market-clearing and rational-expectations conditions. This characterization represents stable match-ings as solutions to a system of demand equations. The cutoffs and market-clearing condition capture the standard pairwise-stability logic, while the matching statistics and rational-expectations condition capture the coordination problem created by peer-dependent preferences. Cutoffs are admission thresholds for each school. Analogous to prices, they deter-mine each student’s budget set: a student can attend a school if her priority exceeds that school’s cutoff. Given a cutoff–statistics pair, the student’s demand is her most preferred school among those in her budget set. Student preferences are those induced by the conjectured matching statistics. A cutoff–statistics pair is market-clearing and rational-expectations if assigning every student to her demanded school does not vio-

> 3In particular, the formulation excludes settings such as couples seeking joint assignments, where preferences depend directly on the assignment of a particular individual; see, e.g., Klaus and Klijn (2005).

3late any capacity constraint and the conjectured matching statistics coincide with those generated by the resulting assignment. Every stable matching corresponds to such a cutoff–statistics pair, and conversely every market-clearing and rational-expectations cutoff–statistics pair induces a stable matching. The demand characterization brings the model closer to a standard competitive-equilibrium framework and allows us to use the fixed-point approach commonly employed in that literature. Existence is not automatic, however. Standard fixed-point arguments require continuity, and demand need not be continuous in the matching statistics, even in a continuum economy. We provide a simple example showing that this is not merely a technical obstacle: a stable matching may fail to exist even in the continuum. Despite this nonexistence example, stable matchings exist under a broad and natural condition. Aggregate demand can be discontinuous only if an arbitrarily small change in matching statistics causes a positive mass of students to simultaneously change their ordinal rankings. We rule out such (pathological) cases by introducing an assumption we term diversity of preferences . This assumption requires that small changes in matching statistics affect only a small fraction of students’ ordinal rankings. Diversity of prefer-ences thereby ensures continuity of aggregate demand 4 and, hence, the existence of a stable matching. We argue that the assumption is natural and show in Section 6 that it is satisfied by standard empirical specifications. The continuum existence result suggests that nonexistence in large finite markets may stem from indivisibilities, and that an approximately stable matching should exist. We formalize this intuition by considering finite economies sampled from a continuum economy. Under mild additional local regularity conditions, sufficiently large sampled economies admit an approximately stable matching with high probability. Our notion of approximate stability preserves capacity constraints exactly and requires only that any blocking pair offer the student at most a small gain. Thus, arbitrarily small frictions may suffice to sustain such a matching in practice, without requiring flexible capacities or other adjustments by colleges or the market designer. The large-market approach, however, does not restore the full familiar structure of stable matching. As previous work has shown, peer-dependent preferences can lead to multiple stable matchings and failures of the lattice structure and the Rural Hospital Theorem. These failures persist even in the continuum economy: they reflect the co-ordination problem created by peer-dependent preferences, rather than finite-market 

> 4Notably, our existence result does not require individual preferences to be continuous, nor does it rely on students being indifferent between schools.

4indivisibilities. We provide examples illustrating these failures and the economic forces behind them. 

Related literature 

This paper is motivated by empirical findings showing that student preferences for col-leges or public schools may depend on the assignment of peers. Such dependency can arise for multiple reasons: Composition of peers affects student achievement (Duflo, Du-pas, and Kremer 2011; Lavy and Schlosser 2011; Lavy, Paserman, and Schlosser 2012; Booij, Leuven, and Oosterbeek 2017; Schiltz, Mazrekaj, Horn, and De Witte 2019); La-bor market returns to a college major may depend on the number of students enrolling in related majors (Bianchi 2020); Parents’ preferences for a school can depend on the composition of its enrolled students (Epple and Romano 1998; Epple, Jha, and Sieg 2018; Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Pathak, Schellenberg, and Walters 2020; Rothstein 2006; Allende 2021); Additionally, students with incomplete information may update their preferences when observing the choices of others (Chakraborty, Citanna, and Ostrovsky 2010; Liu, Mailath, Postlewaite, and Samuelson 2014). Previous work has been insightful and successful in showing how stable matching theory breaks with peer-dependent preferences, but gave positive results under stronger assumptions than what empirical model need. Prior research has been very informative in showing how classical stable-matching results can fail when preferences depend on peer assignments, and has established posi-tive results under economically meaningful restrictions. However, these positive results impose restrictions that are too strong to accommodate the preference specifications commonly used in empirical work. Sasaki and Toda (1996) shows that stable matching may not exist in a finite indivisible matching market. Echenique and Yenmez (2007) considers a discrete many-to-one matching with peer-dependent preferences and devel-ops an algorithm that finds core matchings if they exist, and suggests partial solutions for when the core is empty. The approach in this paper is closely related to that of Fisher and Hafalir (2016), who study one-to-one matching with externalities in a large-market framework in which the externality generated by any individual agent is bounded. Their model, however, does not exploit the tractability afforded by a cutoff characteri-zation and restricts peer effects to one-dimensional aggregate externalities. Calsamiglia, Mart´ ınez-Mora, and Miralles (2021) analyzes the Boston mechanism and allows stu-dent preferences to depend on a quality measure. Dur and Wiseman (2019) considers 5students with neighbor-dependent preferences. Che, Hahm, J. Kim, S.-J. Kim, and Tercieux (2025) studies prestige seeking in competitive college admission. Phan, Tier-ney, and Zhou (2024) studies school assignment where students have preferences over crowding and suggest a new equilibrium notion that accommodates crowding. Pycia (2012) shows the existence of a stable matching when agent preferences are aligned. Mumcu and Saglam (2010) provides a sufficient condition on the whole pref-erence profile that guarantees the existence of a stable matching. Along with two con-ditions to restrict externalities in firms’ choice sets, Bando (2012) shows that stable matchings exist under an extension of substitutability. Baccara, ˙Imrohoro˘ glu, Wilson, and Yariv (2012) analyzes an assignment problem with externalities due to benefits from proximity to others in a network. Pycia and Yenmez (2023) shows that a stable match-ing is guaranteed to exist when peer-dependent preferences satisfy an elegant substitutes assumption, but may fail to exist otherwise. Rostek and Yoder (2020) shows existence under matching with complementary contracts. The previous literature imposes restrictions on student preferences that may not be compatible with empirical needs. Consider, for example, that one STEM-oriented stu-dent may seek to attend a school with other strong STEM students to benefit from having strong peers, while another student may seek to avoid the increased competi-tion and pressure. A model with both types of students will violate the restriction on preferences required by the literature above. In contrast to these papers, the present paper allows for general peer-dependent preferences. Because we allow for preferences that violate the substituability conditions identified by Pycia and Yenmez, 2023, their results imply that a stable matching may fail to exist in a finite market. We circumvent the nonexistence of a stable matching by considering an approximate stable matching. Contemporaneous work of Cox, Fonseca, Pakzad-Hurson, and Pecenco (2023) studies a related question in economies where peer effects arise because student performance depends on their ranking within their class. Using data on college applicants in New South Wales, they identify peer-dependent preferences, show that standard matching mechanisms may fail to produce stable outcomes under such preferences, and propose a mechanism that restores stability. Subsequent work by Carmona and Laohakunakorn (2023) shows the existence of a stable matching in a continuum economy when student utilities are continuous. Epple and Romano (1998), Epple, Jha, and Sieg (2018), Barseghyan, Clark, and Coate (2019) theoretically study school choice in the presence of peer-dependent prefer-ences. Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Pathak, Schellenberg, and Walters (2020) develops a framework 6for estimating student preferences for peer quality and finds that peer quality affects student preferences. Allende (2021) empirically studies school choice using administra-tive data from Peru. She estimates a structural model that accounts for peer-dependent preferences and evaluates counterfactual designs. Campos and Kearns (2024) evaluates the effect of competition among schools and finds that school choice can improve the quality of schools. These models assume that schools do not face capacity constraints. The model in this paper provides a generalized framework that incorporates capacity constraints and provides a connection between these models and stable matching models. In addition, this paper provides results for finite sampled economies. The model adds to a growing strand of papers that use matching models with a continuum of agents. 5 Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Che, and Yasuda (2015) and later work by Ashlagi and Shi (2014) uses a continuum model to guide the design of school choice mechanisms. The present model builds upon the continuum matching model of Azevedo and Leshno (2016) and extends it to allow for peer-dependent preferences. Che, J. Kim, and Kojima (2019) and Azevedo and Hatfield (2018) use continuum models to analyze matching markets in which firm preferences exhibit complementarities. Greinecker and Kah (2021) and Jagadeesan (2017) develop models with a continuum of agents and prove the existence of a stable matching in their models. The present model differs from the approach taken in these papers in that the model does not require continuity or other restrictions on individual preferences to show the existence of a stable matching. Our approach is similar to Azevedo, Weyl, and White (2013) in that we allow individual preferences to be discontinuous, but our diversity of preferences assumption implies continuity of aggregate demand. Preferences in our model can depend on the distribution of student attributes as-signed to each college, but not on the assignment of an individual student. In that, our model is distinct from matching models in which couples seek joint assignments (Klaus and Klijn 2005; Kojima, Pathak, and Roth 2013; Ashlagi, Braverman, and Hassidim 2014). 

Organization of the Paper 

Section 2 presents the model and defines stable matchings for peer-dependent prefer-ences. Section 3 provides the cutoff characterization. The main result showing the existence of a stable matching and examples showing the necessity of the diversity of 

> 5Ellickson, Grodal, Scotchmer, and Zame, 1999 study a continuum model to analyze club formation and show the existence of a competitive equilibrium.

7preferences assumption are in Section 4. This section also explores the structure of the set of stable matchings and provides examples. Section 5 defines and shows the exis-tence of approximately stable matching in large sampled economies. Section 6 shows that a standard empirical framework satisfies our assumptions. Section 7 concludes. Additional examples are in Appendix A. Omitted proofs are in Appendix C. 

# 2 Matching with Peer-Dependent Preferences 

There are finitely many colleges, and the set of colleges is denoted C = {c1, . . . , c J }. Each college c ∈ C has capacity to admit a mass of qc > 0 students. A student is described by a type θ =  χθ, γ θ, r θ, where χθ specifies the student’s attributes that can enter into other students’ peer-dependent preferences, γθ specifies the student’s peer-dependent preferences over colleges, and rθ captures the student’s priority at each college. The vector rθ ∈ [0 , 1] C specifies colleges’ priorities for student θ. College c gives higher priority to student θ1 than to student θ2 if rθ1 

> c

> r θ2 

> c

. We refer to rθ as θ’s priority or rank. For brevity of notation, we assume all students and colleges are acceptable. 6

The attributes of student θ are given by a vector χθ ∈ X , where the set X ⊂ RL is bounded, closed, convex, and 0 ∈ X . The preferences of student θ over colleges are parameterized by γθ ∈ Γ, where Γ is a subset of a Euclidean space. Student preferences are defined below, and can depend on the entire matching. Let Θ = X × Γ × [0 , 1] C

denote the set of all student types. An economy is E = [Θ , C, η, q ] where η is a measure over Θ. It is convenient to nor-malize η so that η (Θ) = 1 and interpret η as the joint distribution of student attributes, preferences, and priorities. Without loss of generality, we normalize priorities so that rθc

is θ’s percentile in college c’s ranking. 7

A matching is an η-measurable function μ : Θ → C ∪ { ϕ}, where we use ϕ to denote that a student is unmatched. With slight abuse of notation we use μ (c) instead of μ−1 (c)to denote the set of students matched to college c. To rule out multiple matchings that differ on a zero measure set, we restrict attention to right-continuous matchings. 8                     

> 6That is, any student prefers to match to any college rather than to remain unmatched, and any college that did not fill its capacity is willing to admit any student. This assumption simplifies notation without restricting the analysis. A student’s outside option can be represented by a dummy college with unlimited capacity, while college-side unacceptability can be represented by a mass of dummy students corresponding to the college’s unfilled seats.
> 7Formally, rθc=η
> n
> θ′rθc> r θ′
> c
> o
> .
> 8Amatching is right continuous (Azevedo and Leshno, 2016) if for every c∈Cthe set

8Student preferences over colleges can depend on the attributes of students assigned to each college. Given a matching μ, the matching statistics of college c are 

σc (μ | η) = 

Z

> θ∈μ(c)

χθdη . (1) We write σc (μ) when η is clear from context, and use s = σ (μ) =  σc (μ) 

> c∈C

∈ X C ⊂

RJ×L to denote the full vector of matching statistics. 9 We use sc = σc (μ) to denote the matching statistics for college c. For example, sc = σc (μ) can capture the average SAT score of students assigned to c, gender balance, or the mass of admitted students interested in becoming English majors. 10 

We allow student preferences over colleges to depend on the entire matching μ

through the statistics s = σ (μ). The utility of student θ =  χθ, γ θ, r θ of being assigned to c = μ (θ) given the matching μ is denoted by uθ (c; σ (μ)). We allow uθ (c; σ (μ)) to be an arbitrary function of the matching statistics s = σ (μ), preference parameters γθ, and the college c ∈ C . For brevity, we also use uθ (c; μ) or uθ (c; s) to denote the student’s utility. Unless stated otherwise, we normalize the utility of being unmatched to 0, i.e., 

uθ (ϕ; μ) = 0 for any student θ and any matching μ.For s = σ (μ) we write ≻θ|s or ≻θ|μ to denote the preference ordering induced by 

uθ (c; s). 11 To simplify notation, we break ties in student preferences using an arbitrary tie-breaking rule. 12 This is without loss, because any matching that is stable given the refined preferences is also stable given the unrefined preferences. Throughout the paper, we impose the following standard assumption, which corre-sponds to colleges having strict preferences over students. This assumption entails no loss of generality when colleges’ priority rankings contain ties: if ties are broken arbitrar-ily, any matching that is stable under the resulting strict priorities is also stable under the original priorities.                                                                           

> θ|μ(θ)≺θ|μcis open, with ≺θ|μdefined below.
> 9The fact that σc(μ)∈ X follows from the definition of Xas a convex and closed set that contains the origin. The particular σis chosen to simplify exposition. Our results apply for any σ(·) such that there exists a constant M > 0 such that ∥σ(μ)−σ(μ′)∥∞≤M·η({θ|μ(θ)̸=μ′(θ)}) for all μ, μ ′.
> 10 Formally, the function σdefined above can include both the total SAT score of students assigned to the college as well as the total mass of students assigned to the college. We allow student utilities that are arbitrary functions of the matching statistics and can depend on the ratio of these statistics, i.e., the average SAT score.
> 11 That is, for s=σ(μ) we write c1≻θ|μc2if uθ(c1;s)> u θ(c2;s). To simplify notation, we also use
> ≻θ|sfor svalues which are not in the image of σ(·). We arbitrarily define ≻θ|sfor such svalues.
> 12 For example, break ties by setting ci≻θ|μcjwhenever uθ(ci;s) = uθ(cj;s) and i < j .

9Assumption 1. For any college c ∈ C and priority x ∈ R the set of students that have priority equal to x is of η-measure zero, that is, η   θ ∈ Θ | rθc = x  = 0 .

Assumption 1 implies that students are non-atomic, and, consequently, that the matching statistics are invariant to the assignment of a single student. In other words, if two matchings μ, μ ′ differ only in the assignment of student θ1 (that is, μ (θ) = μ′ (θ)for any θ̸ = θ1), then both matchings have identical matching statistics (that is, σ (μ) = 

σ (μ′)). Thus, given Assumption 1, we can interpret ≻θ|μ as student θ’s preferences over his potential college assignment given that the remaining students are assigned according to μ. Given this, we define stable matchings as follows. 

Definition 1. A student-college pair ( θ, c ) blocks matching μ if c ≻θ|μ μ (θ) and either 

η (μ (c)) < q c or there is a student θ′ ∈ μ (c) such that rθc > r θ′ 

> c

. A matching μ is stable if η (μ(c)) ≤ qc for all c ∈ C and there is no student-college pair ( θ, c ) that blocks μ.In other words, a pair ( θ, c ) blocks the matching μ if both would prefer to be matched to each other, holding the rest of the match constant. Implicitly, this definition assumes that the endogenous student preferences ≻θ|μ of student θ are independent of the as-signment of student θ. This guarantees that student θ has well-defined preferences over potential assignments. 13 

This notion of stability is a pairwise stability notion. That is, this stability notion requires that pairs of participants cannot benefit by deviating from the match and form-ing alternative matches. In standard matching models, pairwise stability is equivalent to the core; that is, an arbitrary coalition of participants cannot benefit by deviating from the match and forming alternative matches. In contrast, our pairwise stability notion is not equivalent to the core, because a large coalition of agents might be able to benefit by forming alternative matches and changing the matching statistics. 14 See Example 3 for an illustration.  

> 13 In particular, this avoids problems that can arise in discrete models. For example, consider a discrete model with an extremely high GPA student who increases the average GPA of any college she is assigned to, and has a preference for the college with the highest GPA. Such a student prefers whichever college she is assigned to.
> 14 A coalition of students can benefit from forming an alternative match only if this alternative match has different matching statistics. Thus, a coalition of measure 0 of students cannot benefit by forming an alternative match.

10 3 Characterization of Stable Matchings 

We show in this section that any stable matching can be represented and solved for by cutoffs and matching statistics. This tractable representation provides a natural framework for empirical work, and it is used to prove the results in the following sections. 

Cutoffs P ∈ [0 , 1] C specify a minimal priority required for admission to each college 

c ∈ C . Given cutoffs P , student θ has sufficient priority to be admitted to the set of colleges Bθ (P ) = c ∈ C | rθc ≥ Pc . We refer to Bθ (P ) as θ’s budget set given P .Given cutoffs P and statistics s we define the demand of student θ as 15 

Dθ (P, s ) = max 

> ≻θ|s

Bθ (P ) .

Given ( P, s ) ∈ [0 , 1] C × X C , the total mass of students that demands college c ∈ C is 

Dc (P, s | η) = η   θ | Dθ (P, s ) = c  .

The demand given ( P, s ) is the vector 

D (P, s | η) =  Dc (P, s | η) 

> c∈C

,

specifying the mass of students that demand each college. We write D (P, s ) when η is clear from context. 

Definition 2. A pair ( P, s ) ∈ [0 , 1] C × X C of cutoffs and matching statistics is rational expectations and market clearing if (i) Market Clearing: 

D (P, s ) ≤ q , 

and Pc = 0 for any college c for which Dc (P, s ) < q c.(ii) Rational Expectations: 

s = σ (μ)for the matching μ defined by μ (θ) = Dθ (P, s ). The matching μ (θ) = Dθ (P, s ) can be implemented by publishing ( P, s ). Each student θ forms preferences over colleges ≻θ|s given the matching statistics s. Using           

> 15 If Bθ(P) = ∅we define Dθ(P, s ) = ϕ, that is, θdemands to be unassigned.

11 these preferences, each student θ chooses his most preferred college from the set of colleges Bθ (P ) = c ∈ C | rθc ≥ Pc for which θ has sufficient priority for admission given P . Condition (i) of Definition 2 ensures that μ does not assign any college more students than the college’s capacity, and that a college that did not fill its capacity is willing to admit any student. Condition (ii) ensures that students choose among colleges with the correct expectation of the matching statistics s. In other words, condition (ii) implies that if we assign each student θ′̸ = θ to μ (θ′), student θ’s ranking over his college potential assignments is indeed ≻θ|s=≻θ|μ.The following lemma shows that stable matchings are equivalent to rational expec-tations and market-clearing pair. 

Lemma 1. If the pair (P, s ) is rational expectations and market clearing, then the match-ing μ defined by μ (θ) = Dθ (P, s ) is a stable matching. Conversely, if μ is a stable matching then the pair (P, s ) defined by 

s = σ (μ) , Pc =



inf rθc | θ ∈ μ(c) if η (μ (c)) = qc

0 if η (μ (c)) < q c

is rational expectations and market clearing. 

Lemma 1 provides a tractable characterization of stable matchings. It allows the calculation of a stable matching as a solution of a system of equations. The proof of Theorem 1 in the following section builds upon this tractable representation. 

# 4 Existence and Structure of Stable Matchings 

In this section, we show that a stable matching always exists in economies that satisfy one additional assumption. To motivate this assumption, consider the following example. 

Example 1. There are two colleges C = {c1, c 2}, each with capacity q1 = q2 = 1. All students have identical attributes and preferences and differ only by their priorities. Formally, the set of student types is Θ = X × Γ × [0 , 1] 2 = [0 , 1] × { ¯γ} × [0 , 1] 2. The measure η is uniform over { ¯χ} × { ¯γ} × [0 , 1] 2 ⊂ Θ. Students have a single attribute ¯χ = 1, and the matching statistics correspond to the mass of students assigned to each college, namely s =  η (μ (c1)) , η (μ (c2)) . All students strictly prefer college c1 over college c2 if and only if the mass of students assigned to college c1 is strictly below 1 /2, 12 namely, the utility of any student θ is 

uθ (c1; μ) = 



0 if sc1 ≥ 1/22 if sc1 < 1/2

uθ (c2; μ) = 1 .

A stable matching does not exist in the economy of Example 1, even though students are non-atomic. Because all agents have identical preferences and colleges have sufficient capacity, in any stable matching, all students must be matched to the same preferred college. Student preferences are discontinuous, and students always strictly prefer one of the colleges. But the collective mass of students behaves as a single discrete student with “Groucho Marx preferences” – they would like to match to c1 if and only if they are not matched to c1.16 

As discussed in the literature review, several papers rule out such economies by re-quiring that students’ preferences are continuous. If the utility function in Example 1 was continuous there must have been some sc1 that makes all students indifferent be-tween both colleges, and there would have existed a stable matching in which indifferent students are split between the colleges in precisely the correct ratio to make all students indifferent between the two colleges. This stable matching may be unsatisfactory be-cause it crucially relies on all students being indifferent between the two colleges, and the implementation of this matching requires a precise split of these indifferent students between the two colleges. We take a different approach. Rather than imposing restrictions on any individual student’s preferences, we impose an aggregate condition on the distribution of prefer-ences. In particular, our argument does not rely on the existence of students who are indifferent between colleges. 17    

> 16 "Please accept my resignation. I don’t want to belong to any club that will accept people like me as a member "- Groucho Marx in a telegram to the Friar’s Club of Beverly Hills to which he belonged (Marx 1959, p. 321).
> 17 Assumption 2 is related in spirit to several regularity conditions in the literature, but differs in what it restricts. The large-market regularity condition of Liu and Pycia (2016) requires the assignment mechanism to produce similar allocations when the reports of a small fraction of participants change. By contrast, Assumption 2 restricts agents’ preferences rather than the sensitivity of the mechanism’s outcome; in particular, it allows a stable matching to change substantially following changes in the reports of even a small number of agents. The assumptions of Fisher and Hafalir (2016) require that changing the assignment of a single agent not alter any other agent’s ordinal ranking. By contrast, Assumption 2 permits the ordinal preferences of a small mass of agents to change arbitrarily.

13 Assumption 2 (Diversity of preferences) . For any matching statistics s, and any ε > 0

there exists δ > 0 such that η   θ | ≻ θ|s̸ =≻θ|s′  < ε for any s′ such that ∥s − s′∥∞ < δ .

In other words, diversity of preferences is satisfied if a sufficiently small change to the matching statistics causes only a small fraction of students to change their preference orderings over colleges. Diversity of preferences is trivially satisfied if student preferences do not depend on the matching statistics. In Section 6, we show that the assumption is satisfied by standard empirical models that incorporate individual taste shocks. As an illustration, we adapt the economy from Example 1 to satisfy the diversity of preferences. 

Example 2. We change the economy of Example 1 by setting Γ = [0 , 1], and taking the measure η to be uniform 18 over { ¯χ} × [0 , 1] × [0 , 1] 2 ⊂ Θ. The utility of θ =   ¯χ, γ θ, r θ is 

uθ (c1; μ) = 



0 if sc1 ≥ γθ

2 if sc1 < γ θ

uθ (c2; μ) = 1 .

The economy in Example 2 satisfies diversity of preferences, as a small change to the matching statistics s = σ (μ) can cause a student θ to change his preference ordering only if γθ is sufficiently close to sc1 . Although all students have discontinuous utility functions, because different students have different preferences, there exists an assignment that can satisfy all students. The economy has a unique stable matching μ given by 

μ (θ) = 



c1 if γθ ≥ 1/2

c2 if γθ < 1/2 .

The following theorem shows that the existence of a stable matching is not a coincidence and that a stable matching exists in any economy satisfying diversity of preferences. 

Theorem 1. A stable matching exists in any economy E = [Θ , C, η, q ] that satisfies diversity of preferences. 

The proof of Theorem 1 relies on the cutoff characterization of stable matching. Lemma 1 allows us to transform the problem of finding a stable matching into the simpler finite-dimensional problem of finding ( P, s ) that are market-clearing and rational 

> 18 This measure corresponds to no correlation between a student’s preferences and priorities.

14 expectations. After this transformation, we can use a fixed-point argument to show that there exists a market-clearing and rational expectations ( P, s ). The diversity of preferences assumption ensures that the demand D (P, s ) is continuous in P and s.

## 4.1 The structure of the set of stable matchings 

In standard economies, the set of stable matchings forms a lattice, with a corresponding lattice of market-clearing cutoffs. In particular, there exists a stable matching that is preferred by all students, in that it gives each student higher utility than any other stable matching. Moreover, generically, there is a unique stable matching (Azevedo and Leshno, 2016). Previous work shows that these properties need not extend to economies with peer-dependent preferences (Sasaki and Toda, 1996; Pycia and Yenmez, 2023). The following example demonstrates that, even in a continuum economy, a simple and natural peer externality can cause all of these properties to fail. 

Example 3. The economy has two colleges C = {c1, c 2}, each with capacity qc1 =

qc2 = 1 /2. Each student type θ =  χθ, γ θ, r θ has a single attribute χθ ∈ [0 , 1] = X

which represents the student’s GPA (normalized to be between 0 and 1). The matching statistics s = ( sc1 , s c2 ) correspond to the sum of student GPAs at each college. Student utility is 

uθ (c; s) = gθc + βθ · sc ,

which is parameterized by γθ =  gθc1 , g θc2 , β θ. That is, the student gains utility gθc from attending college c irrespective of peers, and gains utility βθ · sc from the quality of his peers. The measure η is uniform over 

  χθ, γ θ, r θ χθ = βθ/16 = rθc1 = rθc2 , g θc1 = 1 , g θc2 = 2 ⊂ Θ.

Thus, student GPA is uniformly distributed, χθ ∼ U [0 , 1], and the student type θ =

 χθ, γ θ, r θ is fully determined by the student’s GPA. In particular, the student’s rank at both colleges equals the student’s GPA, rθc1 = rθc2 = χθ, and the preference parameters are βθ = 16 χθ, gθc1 = 1, and gθc2 = 2. The economy of Example 3 features students who prefer colleges that are attended by peers with higher GPAs. 19 Students with a GPA higher than 1 /2 are assigned to 

> 19 Note that student utilities specify the student’s preferences over colleges, which may differ from the

15 their most preferred college under any stable matching, because such students have sufficiently high priority at both colleges. Although gθc2 > g θc1 , a high GPA student may prefer college c1 if sufficiently many high GPA students are assigned to college c1. As a result, these high-GPA students face a coordination problem. The economy of Example 3 has three stable matchings 

μ† (θ) = 



c1 χθ ≥ 1/2

c2 χθ < 1/2

, μ△ (θ) = 



c2 a△ − 12 ≤ χθ < a △

c1 otherwise 

, μ◦ (θ) = 



c2 χθ ≥ 1/2

c1 χθ < 1/2where a△ =  3 + √5 /8 ≈ 0.65. In matching μ† high GPA students coordinate on college c1. In matching μ◦ high GPA students coordinate on college c2. In matching μ△

the GPAs at the two colleges are less differentiated. Students with χθ > a △ prefer college 

c1, students with χθ < a △ prefer college c2, and the type χθ = a△ is indifferent. The corresponding cutoffs and statistics are P † =  12 , 0 , s † =  38 , 18

, P △ =  0, a △ − 12

 , s △ =

 58 − 12 a△, 12 a△ − 18

 ≈ (0 .3, 0.2), and P ◦ =  0, 12

 , s ◦ =  18 , 38

. Appendix C provides the calculations. In contrast to standard matching markets, there is no stable matching that is pre-ferred by all students. Students with high GPA, χθ ∈ [1 /2, 1], prefer μ◦ over μ† over μ△,namely, 

uθ (μ◦ (θ) ; s◦) > u θ  μ† (θ) ; s† > u θ (μ△ (θ) ; s△) .

Students with intermediate GPA, χθ ∈ a△ − 12 , 12

, have the reverse ranking, namely, 

uθ (μ◦ (θ) ; s◦) < u θ  μ† (θ) ; s† < u θ (μ△ (θ) ; s△) .

Thus, high-GPA students most prefer μ◦, in which they attend college c2 and benefit from both its higher intrinsic value and stronger peers, whereas intermediate-GPA students most prefer μ△, in which they attend college c2 with a mix of higher- and lower-GPA students. In addition, the cutoffs do not form a lattice. For example, there is no market-clearing rational expectation pair ( P, s ) with P =  12 , 12

 or P = (0 , 0). Example 3 also illustrates that our pairwise-stability notion is not equivalent to the core; that is, a coalition may benefit by forming alternative matches. To see this, observe that given μ† students with high GPA ( χθ ∈ [1 /2, 1]) and college c2 can benefit 

> student’s educational gains at each college (e.g., Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Pathak, Schellenberg, and Walters (2020)).

16 by collectively deviating and matching to each other. Example 3 also shows that a highly demanded college may not necessarily have the best intrinsic qualities. In matching μ†, college c1 has a higher cutoff and is preferred by all students with χθ > 1/4, despite all students agreeing that gθc2 > g θc1 . If matching μ† is realized, analysis of elicited preferences that does not account for the possibility of peer-dependent preferences can erroneously indicate that students have strong preference for 

c1 because of its intrinsic quality. 20 

The distinction between peer-dependent preferences and preferences for intrinsic school quality can have important policy implications. For example, consider a pol-icy that transfers all students from college c1 to a new college. This policy is harmful if students have a strong preference for college c1 because of its intrinsic quality. But the policy can lead to a Pareto improvement if students have a preference for college c1 only due to peer effects, as in Example 3. In standard matching markets, such multiplicity of stable matching is a knife-edge case (Azevedo and Leshno, 2016). In contrast, the multiplicity of stable matchings holds in many variants of the economy of Example 3 and does not require precisely tuned parameters. As in standard matching markets, it is possible for a stable matching to be Pareto dominated for students by another stable matching, in the sense that all students strictly prefer one stable matching over another. Appendix A provides such an example. Finally, the rural hospital theorem for standard matching markets states that a stu-dent who is unassigned under some stable matching must be unassigned under all stable matchings. Appendix A provides an example showing that the rural hospital theorem fails to hold in matching markets with peer-dependent preferences. An additional ex-ample in Appendix A shows it is possible to have different stable matchings that have the same cutoffs. 

# 5 Approximate Stability in Finite Sampled Economies 

A continuum economy E = [Θ , C, η, q ] can be interpreted as describing the population of students from which finite economies are sampled. We show that, under mild regularity assumptions, sampled economies admit an approximately stable matching.                     

> 20 Holding the matching statistics sfixed, the true model with uθ(c;s) = gθc+βθ·scis indistinguishable from a model in which students have preferences uθ(c;s) = ˜ gθcthat only depend on a college intrinsic qualities ˜ gθcwith ˜ gθc=gθc+βθ·sc.

17 Formally, a discrete economy with peer-dependent preferences can be captured by 

F = [Θ , C, ˆη, ˆq] where ˆ q ∈ NC and the measure ˆ η is a discrete measure with distinct atoms of equal measure, each atom corresponding to a student. A sampled economy 

F n = [Θ , C, ˆηn, ˆqn] from continuum economy E = [Θ , C, η, q ] is generated by discretizing capacities ˆ qn = ⌊n · q⌋ /n and independently sampling n students θ1, . . . , θ n from η.That is, ˆ η is a discrete measure with ˆ η (A) = 1 

> n

· | A ∩ { θ1, . . . , θ n}| for any A ⊂ Θ. The matching statistics σ (ˆ μn) given a finite matching ˆ μn : Θ → C ∪ { ϕ} are given by 

σc (ˆ μn) = 1

n

X

> θi∈μ(c)

χθi ,

which is the finite analogue of equation (1). Stable matchings may fail to exist in finite economies. We define a matching to be approximately stable if any student who can block the match can only gain a small amount of utility from blocking. If the student’s utility gain from blocking is small, small frictions may suffice to prevent the formation of blocking pairs and prevent unraveling. 

Definition 3. A matching μ with statistics s = σ (μ) is ε-stable if η (μ (c)) ≤ qc for all 

c, and for any student-college pair ( θ, c ) that blocks matching μ the student’s gain from blocking is uθ (c; s) − uθ (μ (θ) ; s) < ε .Our analysis so far imposed no restriction on students’ cardinal utility uθ (c; s). More-over, stability depends only on ordinal preferences ≻θ|s, which are invariant to monotone transformations of the utility function. Therefore, obtaining meaningful results about the magnitude of a student’s utility gain from blocking requires an additional assump-tion. 

Definition 4. Utilities are α locally peer-smooth at matching statistics s if for any stu-dent θ ∈ Θ, college c and matching statistics s′ it holds that uθ (c; s) − uθ (c; s′) ≤

α ∥s − s′∥∞. Utilities are α peer-smooth if they are α locally peer-smooth at any match-ing statistics s.Section 6 shows that utility functions used in standard empirical models are α peer-smooth. 

Theorem 2. Let E = [Θ , C, η, q ] be a continuum economy, and let (P ∗, s ∗) be rational expectations and market clearing such that ∂P D (P ∗, s ∗) exists and is invertible, and utilities are α peer-smooth at s∗ for some α > 0.

18 Let F n = [Θ , C, η n, q n] be a sequence of finite economies sampled from E. Then for any 

ε > 0 there exists N such that for any n > N , with probability of at least 1 − ε, the sampled economy F n has an ε-stable matching. Moreover, there is a ε-stable matching of F n that corresponds to (P, s ) such that ∥P − P ∗∥∞ < ε and ∥s − s∗∥∞ < ε 

> 2α

.

The proof of Theorem 2 leverages the convergence of standard economies 21 to find cutoffs that are close to P ∗ and matching statistics that are close to s∗ that induce an 

ε-stable matching. It may be necessary to adjust both the cutoffs and the matching statistics, because in an ε-stable matching, no college can be assigned more students than its capacity. Theorem 2 implies that an ε-stable matching exists with high probability in a discrete economy sampled from the economy in Example 3. Moreover, for any of the three stable matchings in that economy, there exists an ε-stable matching with approximately the same cutoffs and statistics. 

Remark. The requirement that utilities are α locally peer-smooth implies local continuity of preferences. A weaker condition that does not require continuity of preferences can be used to show the existence of an ε-stable matching for a fixed ε. With minor changes to the proof of Theorem 2 it can be shown that if there exists εu, δ > 0 such that the (potentially discontinuous) utilities satisfy uθ (c; s) − uθ (c; s′) ≤ εu when ∥s − s′∥∞ <δ, then for any εp > 0 there exists N such for any n > N the sampled economy F n has an εu-stable matching with probability of at least 1 − εp.

# 6 Existences of Stable Matching in Common Em-pirical Specifications with Peer Effects 

This section shows that a class of random-utility specifications commonly used in empir-ical analyses of school choice fits naturally within our framework. These specifications allow students to value both intrinsic school characteristics and their peers’ composition. We show that continuously distributed idiosyncratic taste shocks imply that diversity of preferences is satisfied, and therefore guarantee the existence of a stable matching in the continuum economy. Under the additional local regularity condition imposed in Theorem 2, sufficiently large finite economies sampled from the continuum economy also admit approximately stable matchings with high probability. 

> 21 The proof extends the techniques used by Azevedo and Leshno (2016), as it does not directly follow from previous results.

19 A student of type 

θ =  χθ, γ θ, r θ

has utility 

uθ (c; s) = gθc + βθ · sc + ξθc ,

where 

γθ =  gθ, β θ, ξ θ =  gθc1 , . . . , g θcJ , β θ 

> 1

, . . . , β θL, ξ θc1 , . . . , ξ θcJ

 .

Here, gθc captures the student’s utility from intrinsic school characteristics, βθ governs the value placed on different peer characteristics, and ξθc is an idiosyncratic school-specific taste shock. Specifications of this form are widely used in empirical work on school choice and related settings (e.g., Epple, Jha, and Sieg, 2018; Allende, 2021). We allow arbitrary correlation among student attributes χθ, priorities rθ, intrinsic utilities gθ, and peer-preference coefficients βθ. The only distributional restriction is that the taste shocks are independent of these variables and independently distributed across colleges according to a common distribution F with a bounded density f . Formally, for measurable sets X ⊂ X , G ⊂ RC , B ⊂ RL, R ⊂ [0 , 1] C and any rectangle V =

Q 

> c∈C

[ac, b c] ⊆ RC , the measure η satisfies 

η   θ χθ ∈ X, g θ ∈ G, β θ ∈ B, r θ ∈ R, ξ θ ∈ V 

= η   θ χθ ∈ X, g θ ∈ G, β θ ∈ B, r θ ∈ R  Y 

> c∈C

[F (bc) − F (ac)] .

We refer to an economy satisfying these conditions as a linear-preferences economy . The next lemma formally shows that these economies meet the assumptions required for the existence of a stable matching. 

Lemma 2. Let E = [Θ , C, η, q ] be a linear-preferences economy with taste shocks dis-tributed according to F . If F has a bounded density f , then the economy satisfies diversity of preferences. In addition, if 

βmax = sup 

> θ∈Θ

βθ 

> ∞

< ∞,

then cardinal utilities are Lβ max peer-smooth. 

The intuition is that a small change in the matching statistics can change a student’s ranking of two colleges only if the student was initially close to indifferent between them. Individual students may nevertheless have highly heterogeneous preferences over peer 20 composition, and the model permits arbitrary correlation between these preferences, student attributes, and college priorities. Moreover, 

βθ · (sc − s′

> c

) ≤ Lβ max ∥s − s′∥∞ .

Thus, uniformly bounded coefficients on peer characteristics imply the peer-smoothness condition used to obtain approximate stability in sampled economies. Combining Lemma 2 with the main existence results yields the following immediate implication for empirical specifications. 

Theorem 3. Consider a linear-preferences economy with independent taste shocks whose common distribution admits a bounded density. Then the continuum economy has a stable matching. In addition, suppose that βmax = sup θ∈Θ βθ 

> ∞

< ∞ and that there exists a rational-expectations and market-clearing pair (P ∗, s ∗) such that ∂P D (P ∗, s ∗) exists and is in-vertible. Then, for every ε > 0, sufficiently large finite economies sampled from the continuum economy have an ε-stable matching with probability at least 1 − ε.

The first part follows from Lemma 2 and Theorem 1. The second follows from Lemma 2 and Theorem 2. Thus, the existence results in this paper apply directly to commonly used empirical models that combine intrinsic school characteristics, linear preferences over peer composition, and continuously distributed taste shocks. 

# 7 Conclusion 

The model developed in this paper allows a general form of peer-dependent prefer-ences, and does not require continuous preferences or rely on leaving students indifferent between colleges. The diversity of preferences condition implies that while individual students may be discontinuous, the demand given cutoffs and statistics is continuous. Using this observation and the tractable cutoff representation, we show the existence of a stable matching and the existence of approximately stable matchings for finite sampled economies. Our results suggest that, under conditions relevant for empirical applications, finite-market nonexistence is largely due to rounding errors, and that approximate stability is a natural empirical solution concept. By contrast, other failures of classic matching results previously identified in the literature are not due to rounding errors. For example, 21 multiplicity of stable matchings can occur even in the continuum when students have strong incentives to coordinate. Standard matching models can, of course, accommodate preferences that reflect peer quality as long as those preferences are treated as fixed. For example, an elite school may be attractive largely because it consistently enrolls strong students; if its peer composition is effectively fixed, it does not matter whether the model endogenizes the school’s quality. Endogenizing peer-dependent preferences becomes important when evaluating counterfactuals that substantially change school composition and, therefore, may also change the school’s attractiveness. Even when such counterfactuals are not the primary object of interest, it may still be important to distinguish intrinsic school quality from peer-driven attractiveness. This may be challenging to study empirically; the examples in this paper show that observed demand may reveal little about the school’s intrinsic quality. Even when such counterfactuals are not the primary object of interest, it may still be important to distinguish intrinsic school quality from peer-driven attractiveness. This distinction may be difficult to identify empirically; the examples in this paper show that observed demand may reveal little about a school’s intrinsic quality. Our framework rules out preferences that depend on the assignment of particular individuals. Allowing such dependence would encompass settings such as matching with couples and introduce a distinct source of complications. Existing large-market results for couples suggest that these complications may also become manageable in sufficiently large markets (Kojima, Pathak, and Roth, 2013; Ashlagi, Braverman, and Hassidim, 2014; Nguyen and Vohra, 2018). 

# References 

Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Atila, Yeon-Koo Che, and Yosuke Yasuda (2015). “Expanding ‘choice’ in school choice”. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7.1, pp. 1–42. Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Atila, Parag A Pathak, and Alvin E Roth (2005). “The New York City high school match”. American Economic Review 95.2, pp. 364–367. Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Atila, Parag A Pathak, Jonathan Schellenberg, and Christopher R Wal-ters (2020). “Do parents value school effectiveness?” American Economic Review 

110.5, pp. 1502–39. Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Atila and Tayfun S¨ onmez (2003). “School choice: A mechanism design approach”. American Economic Review 93.3, pp. 729–747. 22 Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis (1999). “High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms”. Econometrica 67.2, pp. 251–333. doi : 10 . 1111 / 1468 -0262.00020 .Agarwal, Nikhil and Paulo Somaini (2020). “Revealed preference analysis of school choice models”. Annual Review of Economics 12, pp. 471–501. Allende, Claudia (2021). “Competition Under Social Interactions and the Design of Education Policies”. Working Paper .Almagro, Milena and Tom´ as Dom´ ınguez-Iino (2025). “Location sorting and endogenous amenities: Evidence from amsterdam”. Econometrica 93.3, pp. 1031–1071. Ashlagi, Itai, Mark Braverman, and Avinatan Hassidim (2014). “Stability in large match-ing markets with complementarities”. Operations Research 62.4, pp. 713–732. Ashlagi, Itai and Peng Shi (2014). “Improving community cohesion in school choice via correlated-lottery implementation”. Operations Research 62.6, pp. 1247–1264. Azevedo, Eduardo M and John William Hatfield (2018). “Existence of equilibrium in large matching markets with complementarities”. Available at SSRN 3268884 .Azevedo, Eduardo M and Jacob D Leshno (2016). “A supply and demand framework for two-sided matching markets”. Journal of Political Economy 124.5, pp. 1235–1268. Azevedo, Eduardo M, E Glen Weyl, and Alexander White (2013). “Walrasian equilibrium in large, quasilinear markets”. Theoretical Economics 8.2, pp. 281–290. Baccara, Mariagiovanna, Ay¸ se ˙Imrohoro˘ glu, Alistair J Wilson, and Leeat Yariv (2012). “A field study on matching with network externalities”. American Economic Review 

102.5, pp. 1773–1804. Bando, Keisuke (2012). “Many-to-one matching markets with externalities among firms”. 

Journal of Mathematical Economics 48.1, pp. 14–20. Barseghyan, Levon, Damon Clark, and Stephen Coate (2019). “Peer Preferences, School Competition, and the Effects of Public School Choice”. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11.4, pp. 124–58. Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan (2007). “A unified framework for measuring preferences for schools and neighborhoods”. Journal of political econ-omy 115.4, pp. 588–638. Bender, Stefan, Nicholas Bloom, David Card, John Van Reenen, and Stefanie Wolter (2018). “Management Practices, Workforce Selection, and Productivity”. Journal of Labor Economics 36.S1, S371–S409. doi : 10.1086/694107 .23 Beuermann, Diether W, C Kirabo Jackson, Laia Navarro-Sola, and Francisco Pardo (2023). “What is a good school, and can parents tell? Evidence on the multidimen-sionality of school output”. The Review of Economic Studies 90.1, pp. 65–101. Bianchi, Nicola (2020). “The Indirect Effects of Educational Expansions: Evidence from a Large Enrollment Increase in University Majors”. Journal of Labor Economics 38.3, pp. 767–804. Blum, Yosef, Alvin E Roth, and Uriel G Rothblum (1997). “Vacancy chains and equi-libration in senior-level labor markets”. Journal of Economic Theory 76.2, pp. 362– 411. Booij, Adam S, Edwin Leuven, and Hessel Oosterbeek (2017). “Ability peer effects in university: Evidence from a randomized experiment”. The Review of Economic Stud-ies 84.2, pp. 547–578. Calsamiglia, Caterina, Francisco Mart´ ınez-Mora, and Antonio Miralles (2021). “School choice design, risk aversion and cardinal segregation”. The Economic Journal 131.635, pp. 1081–1104. Campos, Christopher (2024). Social Interactions, Information, and Preferences for Schools: Experimental Evidence from Los Angeles . Tech. rep. National Bureau of Economic Research. Campos, Christopher and Caitlin Kearns (2024). “The Impact of Public School Choice: Evidence from Los Angeles”s Zones of Choice”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 

139.2, pp. 1051–1093. Carmona, Guilherme and Krittanai Laohakunakorn (2023). “Existence of stable match-ings in large economies with externalities”. University of Surrey.[1264] .Chakraborty, Archishman, Alessandro Citanna, and Michael Ostrovsky (2010). “Two-sided matching with interdependent values”. Journal of Economic Theory 145.1, pp. 85–105. Che, Yeon-Koo, Dong Woo Hahm, Jinwoo Kim, Se-Jik Kim, and Olivier Tercieux (2025). “Prestige seeking in college application and major choice”. Available at SSRN 4309000 .Che, Yeon-Koo, Jinwoo Kim, and Fuhito Kojima (2019). “Stable matching in large economies”. Econometrica 87.1, pp. 65–110. Cox, Natalie, Ricardo Fonseca, Bobak Pakzad-Hurson, and Matthew Pecenco (2023). “Peer preferences in centralized school choice markets: theory and evidence”. In. Diamond, Rebecca (2016). “The determinants and welfare implications of US workers’ diverging location choices by skill: 1980–2000”. American economic review 106.3, pp. 479–524. 24 Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer (2011). “Peer effects, teacher incen-tives, and the impact of tracking: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Kenya”. 

American economic review 101.5, pp. 1739–74. Dur, Umut Mert and Thomas Wiseman (2019). “School choice with neighbors”. Journal of Mathematical Economics 83, pp. 101–109. Dworczak, Piotr (2016). “Deferred acceptance with compensation chains”. Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation , pp. 65–66. Echenique, Federico and M Bumin Yenmez (2007). “A solution to matching with pref-erences over colleagues”. Games and Economic Behavior 59.1, pp. 46–71. Ellickson, Bryan, Birgit Grodal, Suzanne Scotchmer, and William R Zame (1999). “Clubs and the Market”. Econometrica 67.5, pp. 1185–1217. Epple, Dennis, Akshaya Jha, and Holger Sieg (2018). “The superintendent’s dilemma: Managing school district capacity as parents vote with their feet”. Quantitative Eco-nomics 9.1, pp. 483–520. Epple, Dennis and Richard E Romano (1998). “Competition between private and public schools, vouchers, and peer-group effects”. American Economic Review , pp. 33–62. Fisher, James CD and Isa E Hafalir (2016). “Matching with aggregate externalities”. 

Mathematical Social Sciences 81, pp. 1–7. Greinecker, Michael and Christopher Kah (2021). “Pairwise stable matching in large economies”. Econometrica 89.6, pp. 2929–2974. Jagadeesan, Ravi (2017). “Complementary Inputs and the Existence of Stable Outcomes in Large Trading Networks.” Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation , p. 265. Joffe-Walt, Chana (July 2020). Introducing “Nice White Parents”’ . New York Times, podcasts section (accessed August 2025). url : https://www.nytimes.com/2020/ 07/23/podcasts/nice-white-parents-serial.html .Klaus, Bettina and Flip Klijn (2005). “Stable matchings and preferences of couples”. 

Journal of Economic Theory 121.1, pp. 75–106. Kojima, Fuhito, Parag A Pathak, and Alvin E Roth (2013). “Matching with couples: Sta-bility and incentives in large markets”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128.4, pp. 1585–1632. Lavy, Victor, M Daniele Paserman, and Analia Schlosser (2012). “Inside the black box of ability peer effects: Evidence from variation in the proportion of low achievers in the classroom”. The Economic Journal 122.559, pp. 208–237. 25 Lavy, Victor and Analia Schlosser (2011). “Mechanisms and impacts of gender peer effects at school”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3.2, pp. 1–33. Liu, Qingmin, George J Mailath, Andrew Postlewaite, and Larry Samuelson (2014). “Stable matching with incomplete information”. Econometrica 82.2, pp. 541–587. Liu, Qingmin and Marek Pycia (2016). “Ordinal efficiency, fairness, and incentives in large markets”. Working Paper .Marx, Groucho (1959). Groucho and me: the autobiography of Groucho Marx . Victor Gollancz, London. Mumcu, Ay¸ se and Ismail Saglam (2010). “Stable one-to-one matchings with externali-ties”. Mathematical Social Sciences 60.2, pp. 154–159. Nguyen, Thanh and Rakesh Vohra (2018). “Near-feasible stable matchings with couples”. 

American Economic Review 108.11, pp. 3154–3169. Phan, William, Ryan Tierney, and Yu Zhou (2024). “Crowding in school choice”. Amer-ican Economic Review 114.8, pp. 2526–2552. Pycia, Marek (2012). “Stability and preference alignment in matching and coalition formation”. Econometrica 80.1, pp. 323–362. Pycia, Marek and M Bumin Yenmez (2023). “Matching with externalities”. The Review of Economic Studies 90.2, pp. 948–974. Rostek, Marzena and Nathan Yoder (2020). “Matching with complementary contracts”. 

Econometrica 88.5, pp. 1793–1827. Rothstein, Jesse M (2006). “Good principals or good peers? Parental valuation of school characteristics, Tiebout equilibrium, and the incentive effects of competition among jurisdictions”. American Economic Review 96.4, pp. 1333–1350. Sasaki, Hiroo and Manabu Toda (1996). “Two-sided matching problems with externali-ties”. Journal of Economic Theory 70.1, pp. 93–108. Schiltz, Fritz, Deni Mazrekaj, Daniel Horn, and Kristof De Witte (2019). “Does it mat-ter when your smartest peers leave your class? Evidence from Hungary”. Labour Economics 59, pp. 79–91. Vapnik, Vladimir N and Alexey Y Chervonenkis (1972). “On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of events to their probabilities”. Measures of Complexity . Ed. by Gammerman A. Vovk V. Papadopoulos H., pp. 11–30. 26 A Additional Examples 

A Pareto-Dominated Stable Matching Example 4. The economy is identical to the economy of Example 3, except that for a student θ with χθ ∈ [0 , 1/2] preference parameters are gθc1 = 2 , g θc2 = 1. For a student θ

with χθ ∈ [1 /2, 1] we maintain that gθc1 = 1 , g θc2 = 2. The matchings μ†, μ ◦ given by 

μ† (θ) = 



c1 χθ ≥ 1/2

c2 χθ < 1/2

, μ◦ (θ) = 



c2 χθ ≥ 1/2

c1 χθ < 1/2are stable matchings for the economy of Example 4, because this economy is identical to the economy of Example 3 except for the change to the preferences of students who only have a single college in their budget set. In the economy of Example 4 all students obtain higher utility under the matching μ◦ than under μ†, as students have identical peers under both matchings but μ◦ assigns each student θ to the college that maximizes 

gθμ(θ) and μ† assigns each student θ to the college that minimizes gθμ(θ).

Different Stable Matchings with Identical Cutoffs Example 5. The economy is identical to the economy of Example 3, except that college capacities are qc1 = qc2 = 2, and the preferences parameters of student θ with GPA χθ

are βθ = 16 ·  χθ + 1 , gθc1 = 1 , g θc2 = 2. In the economy of Example 5, if all students are assigned to college c ∈ { c1, c 2}

then all students prefer college c. Thus, the matchings μ1 (θ) ≡ c1 and μ2 (θ) ≡ c2

are both stable matchings. The corresponding cutoffs and matching statistics are P 1 =(0 , 0) , s 1 =  12 , 0 and P 2 = (0 , 0) , s 2 =  0, 12

.

Failure of the Rural Hospital Theorem Example 6. There are two colleges C = {c1, c 2}, each with capacity 13 . The set of stu-dent types is Θ = X × Γ×[0 , 1] 2 with student attributes X = [0 , 1], and preference param-eters Γ = [0 , 1]. There are three groups of students. Group 1 is a 1 /3 mass of students distributed uniformly over G1 = θ | χθ = 0 , γ θ = rθc1 ∈ 13 , 23

 , r θc2 = rθc1 − 13 ∈ 0, 13

 ,27 that is, students in group 1 have attribute χθ = 0, are the middle priority group at 

c1, and the lowest priority at c2. Group 2 is a 1 /3 mass of students distributed uni-formly over G2 = θ | χθ = 0 , γ θ = rθc1 ∈ 0, 13

 , r θc2 = rθc1 + 13 ∈ 13 , 23

 , that is, students in group 2 have attribute χθ = 0, are the middle priority group at c2, and the lowest priority at c1. Group 3 is contains a 1 /3 mass of students which is uniformly distributed over G3 = θ | χθ = 1 , γ θ = rθc1 = rθc2 ∈ 23 , 1 , that is, students in group 3 have at-tribute χθ = 1 and hold the top priorities at both colleges. The matching statistics s

correspond to the mass of students from group 3 at each college. Student preferences are given by 

uθ (c; s) = gθc + 10 · sc,

where gθc1 = 1 + γθ, g θc2 = 1 (the variation in gθc1 − gθc2 ensures that the diversity of preferences assumption is satisfied). In the economy of Example 6 all students prefer c1 ≻θ|s c2 if all students from group 3 are assigned to college c1 (i.e., s = (1 /3, 0)), and all students have the reverse preferences 

c2 ≻θ|s c1 if all students from group 3 are assigned to college c2 (i.e., s = (0 , 1/3)). Thus, both of the following matchings are stable: 

μ1 (θ) = 



ϕ θ ∈ G1

c2 θ ∈ G2

c1 θ ∈ G3

, μ2 (θ) = 



c1 θ ∈ G1

ϕ θ ∈ G2

c2 θ ∈ G3

.

The stable matching μ1 assigns the students in G2 but leaves students in G1 unassigned, while the stable matching μ2 assigns the students in G1 but leaves students in G2 unas-signed. 

# B Omitted proofs 

Proof of Lemma 1. Let the pair ( P, s ) be rational expectations and market clearing, and consider the matching μ defined by μ (θ) = Dθ (P, s ). Because ( P, s ) is market clearing, for all c ∈ C we have that η (μ (c)) = Dc (P, s ) ≤ qc.Consider a student-college pair ( θ, c ) such that θ prefers c over μ (θ) given the match-ing μ, i.e., c ≻θ|μ μ (θ). Because 

μ (θ) = Dθ (P, s ) = arg max 

> ≻θ|s

Bθ (P )28 and by rational expectations we have that ≻θ|μ=≻θ|s, it must be that c / ∈ Bθ (P ). That is, rθc < P c. This implies that Pc > 0, and from market clearing it must be that 

η (μ (c)) = Dc (P, s ) = qc. Any θ′ ∈ μ (c) must have higher priority than Pc, that is, rθ′ 

> c

≥ Pc > r θc . Therefore, ( θ, c ) is not a blocking pair. Since μ satisfies capacity constraints and is not blocked, it is a stable matching. Conversely, let μ be a stable matching. Define ( P, s ) by 

Pc =



inf rθc | θ ∈ μ(c) if η (μ (c)) = qc

0 if η (μ (c)) < q c

, s = σ (μ) .

For the sake of contradiction, suppose that for some student θ we have that c = μ (θ)̸ =

Dθ (P, s ) = c′. Because θ ∈ μ (c), we have that rθc ≥ Pc and c ∈ Bθ (P ). Because 

Dθ (P, s ) = arg max ≻θ|s Bθ (P ) and by definition ≻θ|μ=≻θ|s, we have that c′ ∈ Bθ (P )and c′ ≻θ|μ c. Thus, rθc′ ≥ Pc′ , and either η (μ (c′)) < q c′ or there exists θ′ ∈ μ (c′) such that rθc′ ≥ rθ′ 

> c′

. In the former case, ( θ, c ′) form a blocking pair. In the latter case, by right continuity of μ there exists θ◦ such that c′ ≻θ◦|μ c and rθ◦ 

> c′

> r θ′ 

> c′

and ( θ◦, c ′) form a blocking pair. Either contradicts the stability of μ.It thus follows that μ (θ) = Dθ (P, s ) for all students θ. Rational expectations imme-diately follows. Market clearing follows because stability of μ implies that Dc (P, s ) = 

η (μ (c)) ≤ qc, and for Dc (P, s ) = η (μ (c)) < q c we have by definition that Pc = 0. 

Existence of a Stable Matching 

Proof of Theorem 1. Let E = [Θ , C, η, q ] be an economy satisfying Assumption 2. Re-call that, without loss of generality, we normalize the total measure so that η (Θ) = 1, and normalize priorities so that a student θ’s priority at each college c is the student’s percentile in college c’s rankings, that is, rθc = η   θ′ | rθc > r θ′

> c

 ∈ [0 , 1] for any c ∈ C ,

θ ∈ Θ. By Lemma 1, it suffices to show the existence of a rational expectations market-clearing cutoff ( P, s ). Let Z (P, s ) = ZP (P, s ) × Zs (P, s ) be defined by 

ZPc (P, s ) =

 

> Pc
> 1+ qc−Dc(P,s )

if Dc(p, s ) ≤ qc

Pc + Dc (P, s ) − qc if Dc(p, s ) ≥ qc

and 29 Zs (P, s ) = σ (μ) for μ defined by μ (θ) = Dθ (P, s ) .

First, observe that if ( P, s ) is a fixed point of Z, then ( P, s ) is rational expectations and market clearing. By definition, Zs (P, s ) = s implies that ( P, s ) satisfies the rational expectations condition (ii). If Zp (P, s ) = P , then for every college c either (a) Dc (P, s ) = 

qc, or (b) Dc (P, s ) ≤ qc and Pc = 0. Therefore, Zp (P, s ) = P implies that ( P, s ) satisfies the market clearing condition (i). Second, we show that Z is a continuous function from the compact, convex set [0 , 1] C × X C to itself. Because X is convex, closed, and 0 ∈ X , we have that Zs (P, s ) ∈X C . To see that ZP (P, s ) ∈ [0 , 1] C observe that if Dc (P, s ) ≤ qc, we have 0 ≤ ZPc (P, s ) ≤

Pc ≤ 1, and if Dc (P, s ) ≥ qc, we have 0 ≤ Zpc (P, s ) ≤ 1 − qc ≤ 1 because Dc (P, s ) ≤

η   θ | rθc ≥ Pc

 = 1 − Pc. Therefore, Z is a function from [0 , 1] C × X C to itself. To show that Z is a continuous function, we show that Zs (·, ·) and D (·, ·) are con-tinuous. For ( P, s ) , (P ′, s ′) define ∆ ( P, s ; P ′, s ′) = θ | Bθ (P )̸ = Bθ (P ′) ∪

n

θ |≻ θ|s̸ =≻θ|s′ o

to be the set of students who have a different budget set under P and P ′ or have different preferences under s and s′. For any θ / ∈ ∆ ( P, s ; P ′, s ′) we have that Dθ (P, s ) = 

Dθ (P ′, s ′), and thus 

∥D (P, s ) − D (P ′, s ′)∥∞ ≤ η (∆ ( P, s ; P ′, s ′)) (2) 

∥Zs (P, s ) − Zs (P ′, s ′)∥∞ ≤ sup 

> x∈X

∥x∥∞ · η (∆ ( P, s ; P ′, s ′)) .

Denote M = sup x∈X ∥x∥∞. Because X is bounded, we have that M < ∞. We have that 22 

η

n 

θ | Bθ (P )̸ = Bθ  P ′o 

≤ X

> c

η

n 

θ | c ∈ Bθ (P ) ⊕ Bθ  P ′o 

= X

> c

η

n 

θ | rθc ∈ min  Pc, P ′

> c

 , max  Pc, P ′

> c

 o 

= X

> c

Pc − P ′

> c

= P − P ′

> 1

≤ J P − P ′ 

> ∞

,             

> 22 We use ⊕to denote the symmetric difference between sets, that is A⊕B=A∪B\A∩B.

30 where the equality in the third line follows from our normalization of rθc (recall that 

J = |C| is the number of colleges). By Assumption 2, for any ε > 0 there exists δ > 0 such that for any ∥s − s′∥∞ < δ we have that η   θ | ≻ θ|s̸ =≻θ|s′  < ε 

> 2M

. Together, we have that if ∥P − P ′∥∞ , ∥s − s′∥∞ <

min  δ, ε

> 2M J

, then we have that 

η (∆ ( P, s ; P ′, s ′)) ≤ η   θ | Bθ (P )̸ = Bθ (P ′)  + η

n 

θ | ≻ θ|s̸ =≻θ|s′ o 

≤ ε

2M + ε

2M

= ε/M . 

Plugging this bound into equation (2) shows that Zs (·, ·) and D (·, ·) are continuous in the sup-norm, and thus Z is a continuous function. By Brouwer’s fixed-point theorem, Z has a fixed point Z (P ∗, s ∗) = ( P ∗, s ∗). We have that ( P ∗, s ∗) is rational expectation and market clearing. By Lemma 1 μ∗ defined by μ (θ) = Dθ (P ∗, s ∗) is a stable matching. 

Existence of an Approximately Stable Matching in Large Sampled Economies 

Proof of Theorem 2. The proof builds upon the convergence of standard economies (see the online appendix of Azevedo and Leshno (2016)) to show that with high probability we can find ( P n, s n) that are close to ( P ∗, s ∗) such that μn (θ) = Dθ (P n, s n) is an ε-stable matching. For ease of reading, steps in the proof are stated as claims. Fixing s∗, we generate a standard continuum economy ˜E = [ ˜Θ, C, ˜η, q ] in which ˜θ =  ≻θ, r θ ∈ ˜Θ and ˜ η is given by ˜η

n ˜θ |≻ θ∈ O, r θ ∈ R

o 

= η   θ |≻ θ|s∗

∈ O, r θ ∈ R 

for any subset of preference orderings O and a subset of priorities R ⊂ [0 , 1] C . Likewise, by fixing s∗ we reduce a sampled economy F n to an economy ˜F n without peer-dependent preferences. Because ˜ η is a projection of η, the distribution of ˜F n is identical to the distribution of economies sampled from ˜ η. Let D (P | ˜η) = D (P, s ∗ | η) denote the demand for economy ˜E.Cutoffs P ∗ are market clearing for ˜E = [ ˜Θ, C, ˜η, q ]. By applying the rural hospital theorem to the standard economy ˜E, if Dc (P ∗ | ˜η) < q c, college c does not fill its capacity under any stable matching and Pc = 0 for any cutoffs P that are market clearing for ˜E.31 Let C (P ∗) = {c ∈ C | Dc (P ∗ | ˜η) = qc} denote the set of colleges that can have a strictly positive market clearing cutoff, and let N (P ∗) = 

n

P ∈ [0 , 1] C | Pc = 0 for all c / ∈ C (P ∗)

o

denote the set of cutoffs that differ from P ∗ only for colleges in C (P ∗). Let Bε (P ∗) = n

P ∈ [0 , 1] C | ∥ P − P ∗∥∞ < ε 

o

denote the ε-ball around P ∗.Define 23 

Z (P | q, ˜η) = max  

> c∈C(P∗)

Pc · [qc − Dc (P | ˜η)] + + [ Dc (P | ˜η) − qc]+ ,

and observe that Z (P | q, ˜η) ≥ 0 for any P , and Z (P | q, ˜η) = 0 if and only if P is market clearing for ˜E = [ ˜Θ, C, ˜η, q ]. 

Claim 1: For any ε1 > 0 there exists m1 > 0 such that for any P ∈ N (P ∗) \ B ε1 (P ∗)we have that Z (P | q, ˜η) ≥ m1 .Fix ε1 > 0. Observe that D (P | ˜η) is continuous in P because 

∥D (P | ˜η) − D (P ′ | ˜η)∥∞ = ∥D (P, s ∗ | η) − D (P ′, s ∗ | η)∥∞

≤ η   θ | Bθ (P )̸ = Bθ (P ′) 

≤ ∥ P − P ′∥1 .

Assume, for the sake of contradiction, that no such m1 > 0 exists. From continuity of 

D (· | ˜η), the function Z (P ) is continuous, and there exists P † ∈ N (P ∗) \ B ε1 (P ∗) such that Z  P † | q, ˜η = 0. We construct a standard economy ˜E† in which P ∗, P † are market-clearing. Construct the economy ˜E† = [ ˜Θ, C, ˜η, q †] to be identical to ˜E except for having college capacities 

q† 

> c

= ˜ η

 ˜Θ



for c / ∈ C (P ∗), and q† 

> c

= qc for c ∈ C (P ∗). That is, we increase the capacity of colleges that were under-demanded under P ∗ to have sufficient capacity to admit all students. For c / ∈ C (P ∗) we have P † 

> c

= P ∗ 

> c

= 0 and Dc (P ∗ | ˜η) , D c

 P † | ˜η ≤ ˜η

 ˜Θ



=

q† 

> c

. For all c ∈ C (P ∗) we have that Dc (P ∗ | ˜η) = qc = q† 

> c

, and Dc

 P † | ˜η ≤ qc = q† 

> c

with 

P † = 0 if Dc

 P † | ˜η < q c because Z  P † | q, ˜η = 0. Thus, P ∗, P † are market clearing for ˜E†.By the lattice structure, P + = max P ∗, P † and P − = min P ∗, P † are also market clearing cutoffs for ˜E†. Without loss, suppose that P +̸ = P ∗. By the lattice structure of market-clearing cutoffs and the rural hospital theorem (Azevedo and Leshno, 2016),    

> 23 We use the notation [ x]+= max {x, 0}.

32 D (P ∗ | ˜η) = D (P | ˜η) for any P ∈ Conv ( P ∗, P +). This implies that if ∂P D (P ∗, s ∗)exists, it must be singular. This contradicts the theorem’s assumption, thereby proving the claim. 

Claim 2: For any ε > 0 and m > 0, there exists N such that for any n > N with probability of at least 1 − ε, demand in the sampled economy ˜F n satisfies sup  

> P∈[0 ,1] C

D (P | ˜ηn) − D (P | ˜η) ∞ ≤ m . 

The claim follows from the Vapnik-Chervonenkis Theorem (Vapnik and Chervo-nenkis, 1972) and the fact that the n-th shatter coefficient (which is the maximum number of possible ways n students can be assigned to J colleges by some cutoffs P ) is bounded by a · nJ for some a > 0. Namely, there exists a > 0 such that the probability that demand deviates by more than m for some P is bounded by Pr { sup  

> P∈[0 ,1] C

∥D (P | ˜ηn) − D (P | ˜η)∥∞ > m } ≤ a · nJ · e−nm 2/32 . (3) Because a · nJ · e−nm 2/32 → 

> n→∞

0, there exists N such that this probability is less than ε

for any n > N .

Claim 3: For any ε1, ε 2 > 0, there is N such that for any n > N with probability of at least 1 − ε2 the sampled economy ˜F n has a market clearing cutoff in N (P ∗) ∩ B ε1 (P ∗) . Let there be ε1, ε 2 > 0. By Claim 1, there exists m1 > 0 such that for any 

P ∈ N (P ∗) \ B ε1 (P ∗) we have that Z (P | q, ˜η) ≥ m1. If C (P ∗)̸ = C, let m2 =min c / ∈C(P ∗) {qc − Dc (P ∗ | ˜η)} and define m = min {m1/4, m 2/4J}. If C (P ∗) = C, define 

m = m1/4. By Claim 2, there exists N such that for all n > N we have that with probability of at least 1 − ε2

|Dc (P | ˜ηn) − Dc (P | ˜η)| ≤ m (4) holds for all P ∈ [0 , 1] C and c ∈ C . In addition, we take N > 1/m so that ∥q − qn∥ ≤ 

1/n < m for any n > N . Let ˜F n be such an economy. Because ˜F n is a standard 33 economy, it has a stable matching with associated market-clearing cutoffs P n. We will show that P n ∈ N (P ∗) ∩ B ε1 (P ∗). When C (P ∗) = C, P n ∈ N (P ∗) trivially holds. To see that P n ∈ N (P ∗) when 

C (P ∗)̸ = C we calculate the cutoffs for an economy with weakly higher demand than ˜F n

through vacancy chains (Blum, Roth, and Rothblum 1997, Dworczak 2016) and show that these vacancy chains cannot fill the capacity of a college c / ∈ C (P ∗). 24 

By inequality 4, demand under ˜ ηn is uniformly bounded by the demand from ˜ η plus the demand from some mass of m · J ≤ m2/4 additional students ˜ η′.25 Consider the standard economy E◦ = [ ˜Θ, C, ˜η + ˜ η′, q n]. We can find a market clearing cutoffs for E◦ by starting from having the mass of students ˜ η assigned according to P ∗ and adjust cutoffs by (i) starting rejection chains by having all the colleges for which qnc < q c reject their lowest ranked students and letting students apply until rejection chains are resolved, and then (ii) starting rejection chains by having all the students in ˜ η′ apply. Because the rejection chains in (i) and (ii) can each add at most m2/4 to the mass assigned to any college, these rejection chains produce market clearing cutoffs for E◦ under which any college c / ∈ C (P ∗) did not fill its capacity. We can also find market clearing cutoffs for E◦ by starting from having the mass ˜ ηn assigned according to their demand under 

P n, and starting rejection chains from the additional demand from ˜ η + ˜ η′. The resulting market clearing cutoffs for E◦ must be weakly larger than P n, and equal to 0 for any 

c / ∈ C (P ∗) by the rural hospital theorem. Therefore, P n ∈ N (P ∗). To see that P n ∈ N (P ∗) ∩ B ε1 (P ∗), observe that for any P ∈ N (P ∗) \ B ε1 (P ∗) we have that                                                    

> Z(P|qn,˜ηn) = max
> c∈C(P∗)
> n
> P·[qnc−Dc(P|˜ηn)] ++ [ Dc(P|˜ηn)−qnc]+o
> ≥max
> c∈C(P∗)
> n
> P·[qc−Dc(P|˜η)] ++ [ Dc(P|˜η)−qc]+o
> −1
> n−m
> =Z(P|q, ˜η)−1
> n−m
> ≥m1/2>0,

and thus P n is not market clearing. Therefore, it must be that P n ∈ N (P ∗) ∩ B ε1 (P ∗).                            

> 24 While ˜Fnis a discrete economy, we can construct an economy with non-atomic students by re-placing each atom θ= ≻θ, r θof ˜ ηnwith a uniform positive density over the set of student types
> (≻, r )|≻ =≻θ, r c∈rθc−δ, r θc
> for sufficiently small δ. Because all college capacities in ˜Fnare mul-tiples of 1 /n , cutoffs never split the mass corresponding to a single student.
> 25 For example, construct such ˜ η′by taking for each c∈ C a mass mof top-ranked students who most prefer c.

34 Claim 4: For any ε > 0, there is N such that for any n > N with probability of at least 1 − ε the sampled economy F n has an ε-stable matching. Let there be ε > 0. Denote M = sup x∈X ∥x∥∞, and let ε1 = ε 

> 2α(6 M J +1)

> 0. By the central limit theorem, for every c ∈ C 

Z

> θ∈μ∗(c)

χθdη n d

→

Z

> θ∈μ∗(c)

χθdη ηn   θ | rθc ∈ [P ∗ 

> c

− ε1, P ∗ 

> c

+ ε1]  d

→ min {2ε1, P ∗ 

> c

+ ε1} .

Therefore, there exists N1 such that for every n > N 1 with probability of at least 1 − ε/ 2we have that for economy F n it holds that 

Z

> θ∈μ∗(c)

χθdη n −

Z

> θ∈μ∗(c)

χθdη ≤ ε1 (5) and for all c ∈ C 

ηn   θ | rθc ∈ [P ∗ 

> c

− ε1, P ∗ 

> c

+ ε1]  ≤ 3ε1 . (6) By Claim 3, for any ε1 > 0 there exists N2 such that for any n > N 2 with probability of at least 1 − ε/ 2 the sampled economy ˜F n has a market clearing cutoff P n for F n such that P n ∈ N (P ∗) ∩ B ε1 (P ∗). Therefore, for n > N = max {N1, N 2} with probability of at least 1 − ε the econ-omy F n satisfies (5), (6) for all c ∈ C , and has a market clearing cutoff P n such that 

P n ∈ N (P ∗) ∩ B ε1 (P ∗). We show that in such economies the matching μ defined by 

μn (θ) = Dθ (P n, s ∗) is ε-stable. Let μ∗ for E be defined by μ∗ (θ) = Dθ (P ∗, s ∗) and let 

sn = σ (μn | ηn). We have that 

|snc − s∗ 

> c

| = |σc (μn | ηn) − σc (μ∗ | η)|

=

Z

> θ∈μn(c)

χθ dη n −

Z

> θ∈μ∗(c)

χθ dη 

≤

Z

> θ∈μn(c)

χθ dη n −

Z

> θ∈μ∗(c)

χθ dη n +

Z

> θ∈μ∗(c)

χθ dη n −

Z

> θ∈μ∗(c)

χθ dη 

≤ 2M η n (μn (c) ⊕ μ∗ (c)) + ε1

≤ (6 M J + 1) ε1

= ε

2α ,

35 where the last inequality follows because 

ηn (μn (c) ⊕ μ∗ (c)) ≤ ηn ({θ | μn (θ)̸ = μ∗ (θ)})= ηn   θ | Dθ (P n, s ∗ | ηn)̸ = Dθ (P ∗, s ∗ | η) 

≤ X

> c

ηn   θ | rθc ∈ [min ( P ∗ 

> c

, P nc ) , max ( P ∗ 

> c

, P nc )] 

≤ X

> c

ηn   θ | rθc ∈ [P ∗ 

> c

− ε1, P ∗ 

> c

+ ε1] 

≤ J · 3ε1 .

To see that the matching μ is ε-stable, consider a student θ who can form a blocking pair with college c. By definition, c ∈ Bθ (P n) and we have that 

uθ (μn (θ) ; sn) ≥ uθ (μn (θ) ; s∗) − α ∥sn − s∗∥∞

≥ uθ (μn (θ) ; s∗) − ε/ 2

≥ uθ (c; s∗) − ε/ 2

≥ uθ (c; sn) − α ∥sn − s∗∥∞ − ε/ 2

≥ uθ (c; sn) − ε

where the first and fourth inequalities follow because utilities are α peer-smooth at s∗,and the third inequality follows because uθ (μ (θ) ; s∗) = uθ  Dθ (P n, s ∗) = max c∈Bθ (P n)

uθ (c; s∗) .

Additional Proofs 

Proof of Lemma (2). Suppose that F has a bounded density f with |f (x)| ≤ ¯f for all 

x ∈ R. Let there be ε > 0. There exists ¯β such that η   θ | βθ 

> ∞

> ¯β  < ε/ 2. We have that if ∥s − s′∥∞ < ε/  4J2L ¯β ¯f  then 

η

n 

θ |≻ θ|s̸ =≻θ|s′ o 

≤ ε/ 2 + η

n 

θ | βθ 

> ∞

≤ ¯β, ≻θ|s̸ =≻θ|s′ o 

≤ ε/ 2 + X

> c1,c 2∈C

η

(

θ βθ 

> ∞

≤ ¯β, uθ (c1; s) < u θ (c2; s)

uθ (c1; s′) > u θ (c2; s′)

)! 

= ε/ 2 + X

> c1,c 2∈C

η

(

θ βθ 

> ∞

≤ ¯β, gθc1 + βθ · sc1 + ξθc1 < g θc2 + βθ · sc2 + ξθc2

gθc1 + βθ · s′ 

> c1

+ ξθc1 > g θc2 + βθ · s′ 

> c2

+ ξθc2

)! 

= ε/ 2 + X

> c1,c 2∈C

η

(

θ βθ 

> ∞

≤ ¯β, ξθc1 < g θc2 − gθc1 + ξθc2 + βθ · (sc2 − sc1 )

ξθc1 > g θc2 − gθc1 + ξθc2 + βθ ·  s′ 

> c2

− s′

> c1

)! 

≤ ε/ 2 + X

> c1,c 2∈C

¯f sup   

> ∥βθ∥∞≤¯β

 βθ · (sc2 − sc1 ) − βθ ·  s′ 

> c2

− s′

> c1

 

≤ ε/ 2 + 2 J2L ¯β ∥s − s′∥∞ ¯f

≤ ε , 

36 and thus E satisfies Assumption (2). For the second part of the lemma, suppose that βmax = sup θ∈Θ βθ 

> ∞

< ∞. Then 

uθ (c; s) − uθ (c; s′) =  gθc1 + βθ · sc1 + ξθc1

 −  gθc1 + βθ · s′ 

> c1

+ ξθc1



= βθ ·  sc1 − s′

> c1



≤ Lβ max ∥s − s′∥∞

and we have that utilities are Lβ max peer-smooth. 

# C Omitted Calculations 

Calculating all the stable matchings for Example 3 

Observe that for any fixed matching statistics s, there are unique market-clearing cutoffs, because both colleges have identical preferences over students. We have that 

uθ (c1; s) − uθ (c2; s) = gθc1 + 16 χθsc1 − gθc2 − 16 χθsc2

= 16 χθ (sc1 − sc2 ) − 1 .

If sc2 > s c1 all students θ have preferences c2 ≻θ|s c1. The unique market clearing cutoffs are P ◦ = (0 , 1/2), yielding the stable matching 

μ◦ (θ) = 



c2 χθ ≥ 1/2

c1 χθ < 1/2and the matching statistics s◦ = (1 /8, 3/8). If sc1 > s c2 a student θ has preferences c1 ≻θ|s c2 if χθ > a for a = 116 (sc1 −sc2 ). If 

a < 1 − q1 = 1 /2 then the unique market clearing cutoffs are P † = (1 /2, 0) yielding the matching 

μ† (θ) = 



c1 χθ ≥ 1/2

c2 χθ < 1/2and the matching statistics s† = (3 /8, 1/8). To verify μ† is a stable matching, calculate that given s† we have that a† = 116 (s†  

> c1−s†
> c2

) = 1 /4 < 1/2. If 1 /2 ≤ a ≤ 1 the unique market clearing cutoffs are P a = (0 , a − 1/2) yielding the 37 matching 

μa (θ) = 



c1 χθ ≥ a or χθ < a − 1/2

c2 a − 1/2 ≤ χθ < a 

because students in [ a, 1] prefer c1, students in [ a − 1/2, a ] prefer c2, and students in [0 , a − 1/2] have a budget set equal to {c1}. The corresponding matching statistics are 

sa = σ (μa) =  5−4a 

> 8

, 4a−18

. We have that a△ =  3 + √5 /8 ≈ 0.65 is the unique 1/2 ≤ a ≤ 1 such that 

a = 116  sac1 − sac2

 = 112 − 16 a .

Therefore, the last stable matching is 

μ△ (θ) = 



c1 χθ ≥ a△ or χθ < a △ − 1/2

c2 a△ − 1/2 ≤ χθ < a △

and the corresponding matching statistics are s△ =  58 − 12 a△, 12 a△ − 18

 =

7−√516 , 1+ √516 



≈

(0 .3, 0.2). 38