Title: MetaSieve: Faster Relational Deep Learning through SQL-Based Metapath Selection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.25903v1

Published Time: Thu, 27 Aug 2026 01:10:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# MetaSieve: Faster Relational Deep Learning through SQL-Based Metapath Selection 

# Fahim Shahriar Khan 

University of Texas at Arlington fsk2739@mavs.uta.edu 

# Ashraf Aboulnaga 

University of Texas at Arlington ashraf.aboulnaga@uta.edu 

## ABSTRACT 

Relational Deep Learning (RDL) is an effective approach to ma-chine learning over multi-table relational databases. In RDL, a data-base is modeled as a graph in which each row is a node and each foreign-key relation is an edge, and a graph neural network (GNN) is trained on this graph. Training a GNN requires sampling a sub-graph around every seed node in the training set, and the cost of training is largely determined by the size of these subgraphs. This paper aims to reduce subgraph size by leveraging the join and ag-gregation capabilities of relational database systems. We observe that sampled subgraphs are obtained by following metapaths com-posed of foreign-key links, and that many of these metapaths can be pruned without loss of accuracy. We present MetaSieve, a meta-path selection layer that determines which metapaths to retain and which to prune. For each candidate metapath extension, MetaSieve computes statistics via SQL join and aggregation queries and eval-uates the extension based on a novel scoring function that prefers lightweight but informative candidates. Metapaths whose scores fall below a threshold are deemed uninformative and pruned. Metapath selection in MetaSieve is lightweight since it relies only on database statistics and task labels, and it is independent of GNN parameters, so it integrates with diverse GNN architectures for classification and regression. Our evaluation on the RelBench benchmark with multiple GNN backbones shows that MetaSieve consistently re-duces per-epoch training time by large margins while maintaining and often improving accuracy. 

Code Availability: 

https://github.com/lids-lab/metasieve 

## 1 INRODUCTION 

Relational databases remain the default foundation for operational and analytical data, and much of the information used to train ma-chine learning models is ultimately stored in relational database tables, connected by foreign-key relationships. Relational Deep Learning (RDL) has emerged as a practical way to learn directly from this multi-table structure by modeling the database as a hetero-geneous graph and training a graph neural network (GNN) on this graph [9]. Each row in the database becomes a node in the graph whose type corresponds to its source table, and each foreign-key link becomes an edge whose type corresponds to its foreign-key type. By operating on the native relational structure, RDL sidesteps the need to flatten tables or hand-engineer features, and has shown strong results across multiple prediction tasks [31]. To train an RDL model for a specific task, the training data consists of rows from some table, termed seed rows , with a task-specific label associated with each row. For example, if the task is predicting customer churn, the seed rows are customers (identified by their customer id) and the labels indicate whether the customer churned. These rows become the seed nodes in the RDL graph, and standard GNN architectures are trained by sampling a subgraph 

from the multi-hop neighborhood of each seed node and using the sampled subgraphs in standard backpropagation neural network training [5, 15, 17]. In the churn example, the sampled subgraph for each customer summarizes their behavior (e.g., purchases, reviews) and is used to train the GNN churn model. The cost of GNN training depends heavily on the size and com-plexity of these sampled subgraphs. These subgraphs are typically sampled by randomly selecting neighbors at each hop, which in the RDL context amounts to following random foreign-key links. One way to improve sampling is to consider the metapaths being sam-pled. A metapath is a sequence of foreign-key edge types traversed from a seed node, and it is well established in heterogeneous graph learning that not all metapaths are equally useful [7, 23, 43]. Some metapaths are irrelevant to the task, others occur too rarely to provide a useful training signal, and still others are very frequent but noisy, increasing training cost without adding label-relevant information. An effective way to reduce the cost of GNN training is therefore to identify useful metapaths and restrict subgraph sam-pling to these metapaths, a problem known as metapath selection .Metapath selection is particularly important for RDL because relational database schemas can be complex, inducing many diverse metapaths of varying usefulness, while large database instances increase the cost of sampling [1, 8]. In this paper, we introduce 

MetaSieve (Metapath Selection via SQL-Informed Evaluation of Valu-able Extensions) , a metapath selection technique for RDL that re-lies on two key ideas: (1) collecting metapath statistics using SQL queries, thereby leveraging a strength of the database system [18], and (2) identifying uninformative metapaths to prune (“sieve”) us-ing principled scoring based on the statistics and task labels. Prior work has shown that counting metapath occurrences is important for metapath selection, since the task label is often deter-mined by aggregate evidence obtained from multiple occurrences of a metapath [8]. MetaSieve counts metapath occurrences using SQL queries that are simple, efficient, and do not require materi-alizing the graph. For example, consider the rel-stack database from the RelBench benchmark [31], which represents the online activity of users on Stack Overflow, and consider the metapath 

> user

→posts →comments . We can compute the number of occur-rences of this metapath for every seed user using a SQL aggregation query (e.g., COUNT(DISTINCT comments) ). We can also compute more complex statistics such as the ratio of comments per post, which we term the rate , capturing “evidence per opportunity” (e.g.,     

> COUNT(DISTINCT comments) /COUNT(DISTINCT posts)

). The queries used by MetaSieve are simple join-and-aggregation queries that can be executed efficiently, and we structure the computation so that each query is executed only once. arXiv:2608.25903v1 [cs.DB] 26 Aug 2026 After collecting statistics for all candidate metapaths, MetaSieve treats metapath selection as a dependence-ranking problem and uses the mutual information (MI) between the statistics and the task label as a measure of metapath relevance [28], building on the standard view that MI captures general (including non-linear) de-pendence and is effective for lightweight feature scoring [2]. To pe-nalize candidates that inflate the sampled neighborhood, MetaSieve makes its relevance measure cost-aware by favoring candidates that achieve high MI with low fanout. MetaSieve also penalizes metapaths infrequently observed in the data, and it combines these measures in a principled way to identify uninformative paths that can be avoided while sampling. Since MI applies to both discrete and continuous labels, the MetaSieve pipeline supports classifica-tion and regression tasks. Furthermore, the pipeline is agnostic to the GNN architecture, so it can be used with any GNN backbone. We conduct experiments with multiple datasets from the Rel-Bench benchmark [31], including the largest, recently added datasets, and we show that MetaSieve substantially outperforms the state-of-the-art MPS-GNN technique [8] in terms of preprocessing time, and 

speeds up training by up to an order of magnitude compared to random sampling and MPS-GNN . MetaSieve often leads to an improvement in accuracy in addition to reducing training time, especially with the state-of-the-art Relational Graph Trans-former (RelGT) [5] GNN. These results hold for both classification and regression tasks. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 

• We introduce a task-specific metapath selection pipeline for RDL that computes metapath statistics efficiently using SQL queries, thereby avoiding graph materialization while directly leveraging relational structure. 

• We propose a novel scoring function for pruning uninformative metapaths that uses mutual information as a lightweight proxy for relevance, penalizes large fanout to favor more compact sub-graphs, and downweights infrequently observed metapaths. 

• We evaluate the full pipeline on both node classification and node regression tasks from RelBench and show that the resulting metapath selection rules transfer across a wide range of GNN ar-chitectures, demonstrating the broad applicability of MetaSieve. 

## 2 RELATED WORK 

Metapath selection in heterogeneous graphs. Metapath selec-tion methods for heterogeneous graphs broadly fall into two groups: methods that learn metapath importance jointly with representa-tion learning inside the model, and methods that treat metapath selection as an external search or optimization problem. In the first group, HAN [39] assumes a candidate set of metapaths and learns their importance through hierarchical attention, GTN [41] removes the need for manually specified metapaths by learning soft edge-type compositions across hops, and GraphMSE [23] combines efficient metapath sampling with attention-based weighting and semantic feature-space alignment. In the second group, PM-HGNN [43] formulates metapath selection as a reinforcement-learning problem over node-specific metapaths, while LMSPS [22] treats metapath discovery as an explicit search problem with progressive sampling. MetaSieve is more like the second group since it treats metapath selection as a preprocessing step before GNN training. 

Relational deep learning. Fey et al. [9] introduce RDL as an end-to-end learning framework for relational databases. 4DBInfer [38] similarly frames predictive modeling on relational databases as graph-centric multi-table learning and emphasizes the joint role of graph construction, subgraph extraction, and model design in a unified toolbox. RelBench [31] provides a public benchmark and the first broad empirical study of RDL. RelBench v2 [14] expands the benchmark by adding larger, more diverse databases, new pre-diction tasks, and support for pretraining and transfer. Within this emerging research area, several backbone architectures have been proposed. RelGNN [4] is an early RDL-specific model that addresses message passing challenges across multiple related tables through composite message passing. RelGT [5] is a recent model that uses a transformer-based design over sampled relational neighborhoods and shows remarkable accuracy. Relational Transformers [30] ex-plore pretraining for transfer to unseen datasets and tasks, extend-ing RDL toward relational foundation models [10, 40]. MetaSieve works with any GNN-based RDL model, and we evaluate it on the state-of-the-art RelGT, in addition to older GNN models. 

Metapath selection for relational deep learning. Two closely related methods for metapath selection in the node classification setting in RDL have recently been proposed. MP-GNN [7] learns useful metapaths incrementally by scoring each extension of a partial metapath, assuming that node labels can be explained by whether a metapath exists in the data. MPS-GNN [8] shows that this assumption can be overly restrictive, since predictions may depend on aggregate evidence from multiple occurrences of the same metapath. MPS-GNN addresses this limitation by learning a scoring function that implicitly uses occurrence-based information rather than path existence alone. This allows the search to favor metapaths whose occurrence patterns, including higher-order sta-tistical patterns like counts-of-counts, is predictive of the node label. However, the search is costly because assessing candidate extensions requires repeatedly training a GNN on the metapaths selected so far. In our experiments, we found that MPS-GNN does not scale because of the need to train a GNN at each step. We also found that it selects metapaths inferior to MetaSieve. Furthermore, it only works for classification, not regression. 

## 3 PROBLEM DEFINITION 

We consider predictive tasks defined by a task table over a relational database. Each row of the task table defines one training instance, or seed node (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝑦 ), consisting of an identifier 𝑠 , a timestamp 𝑡 , and a task label 𝑦 . The identifier 𝑠 is a foreign key linking the task table to the database table that contains the seed nodes, the seed node source table . Sampling begins from this table and expands outward along the graph up to a maximum hop limit 𝐻 . To prevent temporal leakage, only traversed rows with timestamp 𝑡 ′ < 𝑡 are sampled. This temporal consistency condition is also used in RelBench. Ta-bles without timestamps require no temporal condition, and all rows in such tables connecting to 𝑠 are treated as available for sam-pling. MetaSieve assumes that the database contents, schema, and task definition remain fixed during preprocessing, training, and inference; any changes require rerunning the pipeline. This is a common assumption in RDL, and we leave dynamically handling database or schema updates as future work. 

> 2

Relational Database + Task Table           

> Relational Database / Database Schema
> SeedID
> Users Orders user₁
> user₂
> user₃
> …
> Task Table
> timestamp
> 2024-03-12
> 2024-05-08
> 2024-07-21
> …
> label
> 1
> 0
> 1
> …
> Products
> Metapath Selection Pipeline (MetaSieve) Conventional RDL Pipeline
> 1Metapath Statistics
> enumerate (prefix,candidate) pairs
> using the schema
> 1
> 2
> Database as a Heterogeneous Graph
> User
> Order
> Product
> Review
> Sample n-hop Subgraphs
> around seed nodes
> Seed node
> (eg: user₁)
> compute log-count and log-rate
> Feed sampling config to the subgraph sampler 2Scoring
> utility (MI)
> I(X;Y)
> coverage sampling cost
> 3Train GNN on Sampled Subgraphs
> GNN Model
> 3Sampling Configuration Generation
> GMM clustering Pruning rules Sampling Config
> A
> Prediction
> B
> C
> bad good
> Sampled Subgraph

Figure 1: The MetaSieve pipeline. MetaSieve works as a metapath selection layer that plugs into the conventional RDL pipeline. MetaSieve provides sampling configurations to the subgraph sampler, which provides subgraphs for downstream GNN training. 

A metapath is a sequence of schema-valid foreign-key traversals starting from the seed node source table. We write a metapath of length ℎ as 𝜋 1: ℎ = (𝑟 1, . . . , 𝑟 ℎ ), where ℎ ≤ 𝐻 and each 𝑟 𝑖 is one traversal in the relational graph. As an example, recall the metapath 

user →posts →comments from the introduction. If table 𝐴 has a foreign key referencing table 𝐵 , the relational graph has a directed edge from the 𝐴 node to the 𝐵 node, which we call the forward edge . We add a reverse edge for every forward edge, connecting the primary-key node 𝐵 to the foreign-key node 𝐴 . We call a join that follows a forward edge a forward join and a join that follows a reverse edge a reverse join . Thus, every metapath 𝜋 1: ℎ can be viewed as a sequence of forward and reverse joins. For a metapath of length ℎ 𝜋 1: ℎ = (𝑟 1, . . . , 𝑟 ℎ ), let 𝑇 ℎ denote the terminal table of this metapath, i.e., the final table in the join sequence induced by 𝜋 1: ℎ . When extending this metapath to length 

ℎ + 1, we call 𝜋 1: ℎ the prefix metapath , and we define the set of valid next edge traversals from 𝑇 ℎ as C( 𝜋 1: ℎ ). Each 𝑒 ∈ C( 𝜋 1: ℎ ) is called a 

candidate extension . Thus, each pair (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) represents one possible candidate extension of the prefix metapath 𝜋 1: ℎ that MetaSieve evaluates to decide whether it should be pruned or sampled. 

Problem definition. Given a maximum hop count 𝐻 , a data-base schema, and a set of labeled training seed nodes, the goal of MetaSieve is to produce a compact set of sampling rules R. Each rule is defined for one candidate extension, specified by a hop 

ℎ ∈ { 0, . . . , 𝐻 − 1}, a metapath prefix 𝜋 1: ℎ , and the candidate exten-sion itself 𝑒 ∈ C( 𝜋 1: ℎ ). Each rule specifies whether that extension is expanded or pruned: R ( 𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) ∈ { expand , prune }.

## 3.1 Metapath Informativeness 

Following a metapath from a particular seed node reaches a set of database rows. Although the traversal sequence is fixed by the schema, the number of distinct rows reached can vary substantially across seed nodes. This variation forms the metapath’s occurrence pattern and can provide useful predictive evidence when it varies systematically across seed nodes with different task labels. Many relational task labels are influenced by such activity patterns, in-cluding the number of purchases, reviews, visits, or comments associated with an entity. A schema-valid metapath may not provide predictive signal for a particular task. Schema validity only means that the traversal is permitted by the database schema, not that it helps predict the task label. For example, in a user-churn task, a metapath to an account-type table may reach exactly one row for every user, regardless of whether the user churns. Because its occurrence pattern is nearly identical across the two label groups, the metapath provides little discriminative signal. A schema-valid metapath may also occur for too few seed nodes to provide reliable evidence or may introduce many neighbors while contributing little label-relevant information. MetaSieve therefore considers a metapath useful when its oc-currence pattern is discriminative of the task label, with this de-pendence quantified using mutual information (Section 8.1), also when it is observed for enough seed nodes and provides sufficient predictive value to justify its additional sampling cost. 

## 4 METHOD OVERVIEW 

The MetaSieve pipeline (Figure 1) works as follows: (1) Schema processing. Scan the schema and enumerate all valid metapaths starting from the seed node source table, up to a maximum of 𝐻 hops. At every enumeration step, the metapath enumerated thus far is the prefix metapath, and the next step is the candidate extension (Section 5). (2) SQL. Compute metapath statistics for each (prefix, candidate extension) pair over the training seed nodes using SQL queries 

> 3

and without materializing the full graph (Section 6). The seed nodes are divided into batches for this computation (Section 7). (3) Candidate extension scoring. Combine these metapath statis-tics with the seed-node labels and metapath frequency to score each candidate extension. The score reflects the extension’s task relevance, sampling cost, and support in the data. Extensions with low scores are pruned (Section 8). (4) Sampling rules. Use the scores to derive pruning rules that specify which candidate extensions should not be sampled. These rules are provided to the sampler and result in a light-weight sampled subgraph for each seed node that still retains the task-relevant evidence needed for GNN training (Section 9). 

## 5 SCHEMA-GUIDED METAPATH ENUMERATION 

MetaSieve starts by enumerating all possible metapaths originating from the seed node source table by traversing all schema-valid foreign-key links, forward or reverse, up to a maximum hop count 𝐻 .At hop ℎ, for a metapath prefix 𝜋 1: ℎ representing a valid sequence of relation traversals from the seed node source table to terminal table 

𝑇 ℎ , the schema specifies all valid next relation traversals C( 𝜋 1: ℎ ).For every 𝑒 ∈ C( 𝜋 1: ℎ ), MetaSieve evaluates the pair (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ).During enumeration, we disallow immediate backtracking in which a reverse edge is followed by its corresponding forward edge, since this returns to the same node. Such a loop would create candidate extensions that add no new information. However, we do allow metapaths that return to the same node via longer cycles through multiple tables. 

## 6 METAPATH STATISTICS USING SQL 

MetaSieve collects statistics about each candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 )

from the database tables using SQL queries. The key idea is to ma-terialize a frontier table for each metapath prefix 𝜋 1: ℎ representing all the rows reachable by this prefix, and then to reduce the frontier table to a small set of per-seed-node statistics, without materializ-ing the relational graph. Each frontier table is computed once and reused for all candidate extensions that have 𝜋 1: ℎ as a prefix. 

## 6.1 Computing the Frontier 

For a labeled training seed node (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝑦 ) and a metapath prefix 

𝜋 1: ℎ = (𝑟 1, . . . , 𝑟 ℎ ) whose terminal table is 𝑇 ℎ , we define the hop-ℎ

frontier 𝐹 ℎ (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ ) as the set of distinct row identifiers in 𝑇 ℎ that are reachable from 𝑠 by following the join sequence induced by 𝜋 1: ℎ

under the temporal constraint at time 𝑡 . The frontier retains each reachable row identifier only once. As discussed below, duplicate elimination is required for forward joins, where multiple parent-frontier rows may reach the same terminal row, but is unnecessary for reverse joins. The frontier 𝐹 ℎ (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ ) is materialized as a frontier table. Every frontier table contains three core columns: SeedId , timestamp , and 

> last_id

. The pair (SeedId, timestamp) identifies the seed node, and last_id stores the identifier of a distinct row currently reached in the terminal table 𝑇 ℎ . Thus, for each seed node, the frontier ta-ble contains one row for each row of 𝑇 ℎ it reaches, and (SeedId, timestamp, last_id) forms its primary key. Candidate exten-sions at the next hop may require following foreign-key links from this row of 𝑇 ℎ , so these links are also included in the frontier table . That Hop 0 

frontier₀ (seeds) 

> SeedId, ts, label, last_id, fk__*
> Hop 1

frontier(π₁) 

> SeedId, ts, last_id, fk__*
> Hop 2

π₁∘e₁  π₁∘e₂ 

frontier(π₂) 

> SeedId, ts, last_id, fk__*

π₂∘e₁  π₂∘e₂  π₂∘e₃ 

frontier(π₃) 

> SeedId, ts, last_id, fk__*

π₃∘e₁ 

Figure 2: Generating frontier tables across hops. The hop-0 frontier is initialized from the training seed nodes, and each later frontier is generated from its parent by one addi-tional join. Thus, each child hop-ℎ frontier reuses the already-materialized parent hop-(ℎ − 1) frontier. 𝑡𝑠 stands for times-tamp. 

is, the frontier table includes optional columns foreign_key_1 ,

> foreign_key_2

, . . . , foreign_key_n . These store the foreign-key values of the current row in the terminal table 𝑇 ℎ , which will be needed for forward extension at the next hop. This frontier table schema supports both forward and reverse joins. If the candidate extension is a reverse join, the next table is reached by matching one of its foreign keys to the current last_id ,so no additional information is needed in the frontier table beyond the core columns. If the candidate extension is a forward join, the next table is reached by following a foreign-key value in the current row of 𝑇 ℎ to the primary key of a row in the referenced table, and all the necessary foreign-key values are in the frontier table. The two join directions also differ in whether duplicate elim-ination is required. In a reverse join, each matching row in the next table contributes its own unique row identifier, so the result is already duplicate-free. In a forward join, multiple rows in the parent frontier may contain the same foreign-key value and there-fore reach the same row in the next table. MetaSieve consequently applies DISTINCT only to forward joins and not for reverse joins. We initialize the frontier table using the training seed nodes at hop 0. The exact form of this initial frontier depends on the types of candidate extensions at hop 1. If the hop-1 candidate set contains forward joins, the initial frontier must store not only the seed identifier as last_id , but also the foreign-key values needed for these forward joins. In this case, we build the hop-0 frontier by a join that attaches each training seed node to its row in the seed node source table and copies the required foreign-key columns (Listing 1). (We only show the listings of three SQL queries and describe the remaining ones in the text.) As described in Section 3, ⟨temporal_constraint ⟩ in the WHERE clause is instantiated as 𝑡 ′ < 𝑡 when the joined table has a timestamp 

𝑡 ′; otherwise, the predicate is omitted. The same rule is applied whenever a timestamped table is joined in subsequent frontier-construction queries, so that training never considers events that had not yet occurred at the timestamp of the seed node. If the hop-1 candidate set contains only reverse joins, then no foreign-key columns need to be included in the frontier table. In 

> 4

this case, the initial frontier can store only the training seed node, its timestamp, and the seed identifier as last_id (Listing 2).            

> CREATE TEMP TABLE frontier_0 AS SELECT
> SeedId, timestamp, SeedId AS last_id,
> ⟨required_foreign_key_1 ⟩,
> . . . ,
> ⟨required_foreign_key_m ⟩
> FROM training_seed_nodes
> JOIN seed_node_source_table
> ON seed_node_source_table.primary_key =training_seed_nodes.SeedId
> WHERE ⟨temporal_constraint ⟩;

Listing 1: Hop-0 frontier when hop-1 includes forward joins.        

> CREATE TEMP TABLE frontier_0 AS SELECT
> SeedId, timestamp, SeedId AS last_id
> FROM training_seed_nodes;

Listing 2: Hop-0 frontier when hop-1 has only reverse joins. 

After the hop-0 frontier table is initialized, all later frontier tables are generated in the same way, illustrated in Figure 2. Each frontier is obtained from an already-materialized parent frontier via one additional join. Thus, for a candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), we start from the parent frontier of the prefix 𝜋 1: ℎ and apply exactly one join corresponding to 𝑒 , so the prefix frontier serves as reusable state for all of its next-hop candidates. The result of this one-step extension is a new frontier table for the longer prefix 𝜋 1: ℎ+1 = 𝜋 1: ℎ ◦ 𝑒 . As before, we keep one row in the frontier table per distinct row reachable in the terminal table for each (SeedId, timestamp) pair. The new frontier table always updates last_id to the identifier of the newly reached terminal row. Per our design, the new frontier table also carries the foreign-key columns required for future joins. Listing 3 shows the query for expanding a frontier with a reverse join. Each matching row in the next table contributes a unique 

> last_id

, so the query does not require DISTINCT . A forward join uses a similar query with a different join condition, but requires   

> SELECT DISTINCT

because multiple foreign-key values may map to the same primary key in the next table.             

> CREATE TEMP TABLE frontier_ ⟨extended_prefix ⟩AS SELECT
> SeedId, timestamp, next_table.primary_key AS last_id,
> ⟨required_foreign_key_1 ⟩,
> . . . ,
> ⟨required_foreign_key_m ⟩
> FROM frontier_ ⟨prefix ⟩
> JOIN next_table
> ON next_table.foreign_key =frontier_ ⟨prefix ⟩.last_id
> WHERE ⟨temporal_constraint ⟩;

Listing 3: Extending a frontier by a reverse join. 

## 6.2 Metapath Statistics: log-count and log-rate 

A frontier table tells us which rows are reachable by a given prefix for a given seed node. As discussed in Section 3.1, variation in this occurrence pattern across seed nodes can provide predictive signal. To evaluate candidate extensions, MetaSieve summarizes the occurrence pattern using two complementary statistics: log-count ,which captures the total amount of distinct evidence reached by a metapath, and log-rate , which captures the expansion introduced by a candidate extension relative to its parent prefix frontier. These summaries are related to prior work on heterogeneous graphs and relational retrieval, where metapaths are treated as rela-tion sequences with distinct semantics and path-based summaries are used to capture similarity or relevance [21, 33, 34]. MetaSieve follows the same intuition but uses lightweight SQL statistics over frontier tables instead of complex similarity scores or random walks. The first statistic is log-count , which measures the total amount of distinct evidence reached by a metapath. Recall that, for a labeled training seed node (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝑦 ) and a metapath 𝜋 1: ℎ , 𝑁 ℎ (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ ) denotes the number of distinct terminal rows in the hop-ℎ frontier table. We define log-count ℎ (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ ) = ln  1 + 𝑁 ℎ (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ ).

Log-count therefore captures the absolute volume of distinct reach-able evidence. We apply ln (1 + ·) to flatten the potentially heavy-tailed distribution of 𝑁 ℎ (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ ).The second statistic is log-rate , which measures how strongly a candidate extension expands relative to the size of its parent frontier. For a candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), let the extended metapath be 

𝜋 1: ℎ+1 = 𝜋 1: ℎ ◦ 𝑒 . We define log-rate ℎ+1 (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ+1) = ln 



1 + 𝑁 ℎ+1 (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ+1)

𝑁 ℎ (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ )



.

Here, 𝑁 ℎ+1 (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ+1) is the number of distinct rows reached after applying the candidate extension, and 𝑁 ℎ (𝑠, 𝑡, 𝜋 1: ℎ ) is the number of distinct rows already reached by its parent prefix. Log-rate therefore captures the extension’s relative expansion by measuring how much evidence it reaches per row already present in the parent frontier. Log-count and log-rate capture complementary aspects of an extension’s occurrence pattern. For some extensions, the absolute number of distinct rows reached varies systematically with the task label. For others, the more informative pattern is how much the extension expands relative to its parent frontier, even when the absolute number of reached rows is modest. Log-count captures the first type of variation, while log-rate captures the second. Con-sidering both allows MetaSieve to identify predictive occurrence patterns through either absolute reach or relative expansion. Figure 3 illustrates how a parent frontier and its child frontier are reduced to per-seed metapath statistics. For each seed identified by  

> (SeedId, timestamp)

, we group the frontier rows using GROUP BY and apply COUNT(*) to obtain the frontier size. Applying this operation to the child frontier gives the count used for log-count, while applying it to both the parent and child frontiers gives the counts used for log-rate. Because log-rate for a candidate extension depends on both the parent and child frontiers, it can only be computed starting at hop 2. Consequently, pruning begins with hop-1 prefixes and their candidate extensions at hop 2, and no pruning is applied directly 

> 5

frontier(π₁) · parent 

> s₁
> s₂

s₁ : 3 rows · s₂ : 2 rows 

> s₁ → N_parent = 3
> s₂ → N_parent = 2
> log-rate(π₁∘e₁)
> ln(1 + N_child / N_parent)

frontier(π₁∘e₁) · child 

> s₁
> s₂

s₁ : 2 rows · s₂ : 4 rows 

> s₂ → N_child = 4
> s₁ → N_child = 2
> log-count(π₁∘e₁)
> ln(1 + N_child)

Figure 3: Reduction of frontier tables to metapath statistics. In this example, 𝑠 1 and 𝑠 2 denote two seeds, each identified by (SeedId, timestamp) . Each colored bar represents one distinct reachable row belonging to 𝑠 1 or 𝑠 2. By grouping the frontier rows by seed and applying COUNT(*) , we obtain the parent and child count used for log-count and log-rate. 

at hop 1. Frontier tables are retained only while they are needed for further expansion and aggregation. For example, computing log-rate at hop ℎ + 1 requires access to both the parent frontier at hop ℎ and the child frontier at hop ℎ + 1. After the required statistics have been computed, the corresponding frontier tables can be dropped, limiting unnecessary intermediate storage. 

## 7 BATCHWISE EVALUATION OF STATISTICS 

The previous section treats all seed nodes in the training set Strain as one batch for statistics computation. MetaSieve actually evaluates candidate extensions on multiple disjoint subsets of training seed nodes (i.e., multiple batches of seed nodes). The log-count and log-rate statistics are computed separately for each batch, and the resulting distribution of statistics lets us identify stable, repeatable signals for metapath pruning. Batching also enables us to address label imbalance while forming the batches. 

## 7.1 Seed Node Batching and Label-aware Subsampling 

We score candidate extensions on a set of labeled training seed nodes Seval ⊆ S train . In many cases, Seval = Strain , but when the training set is very large or highly imbalanced, we form Seval by subsampling a smaller label-aware subset. This reduces the cost of SQL-based scoring while preventing the evaluation from being dominated by a majority label, which could obscure rarer but im-portant signals [16, 19]. We implement this by capping the number of seed nodes per label. Although related in spirit to class-aware re-sampling [3, 16], the goal here is not to rebalance for model training, but to construct an informative subset for candidate scoring. After this optional subsampling step, we partition Seval into 𝐵 

approximately equal-sized batches, Seval = Ð𝐵 𝑏 =1 S𝑏 . Each batch S𝑏 

contains labeled training seed nodes and serves as the input for frontier materialization and candidate scoring (discussed in section 8). We implement deterministic batching using the SQL window function NTILE , which first orders the seed nodes by identifier and then assigns them to 𝐵 buckets of approximately equal size. 

## 7.2 Benefits of Batchwise Scoring 

We compute the metapath statistics log-count and log-rate for all 

(𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) pairs separately on each batch, and we use the batchwise statistics to score the metapaths. This has two benefits: 

• Stability. Candidate extensions that score well across many batches are more likely to reflect a repeatable relationship be-tween the statistical evidence and the label. Candidates that score well in only a few batches are treated as less reliable, and the spread of scores across batches reveals whether a candidate exten-sion is informative for a broad subset of training seed nodes [25]. 

• Scalability. Because the batches are disjoint, their statistics can be evaluated concurrently and independently by multiple worker threads. Each worker thread can process one batch end-to-end, including frontier materialization, metapath statistics generation, and scoring, without any cross-worker synchronization. This parallel execution can be implemented on any DBMS and results in throughput that scales linearly with the number of workers due to the coordination-free nature of the parallelism. 

## 8 SCORING CANDIDATE EXTENSIONS 

After the SQL-based computation of the log-count and log-rate statistics for the different batches and metapaths, what remains is scoring the candidate extensions based on these statistics, which happens outside the DBMS. Our scoring depends on the utility of an extension to learning the training labels, its cost, and the frequency of the extension in the database. We discuss the details next. 

## 8.1 Mutual Information as a Proxy for Utility 

Each training seed node has an associated task-specific label, and our goal is to retain candidate extensions whose statistics are pre-dictive of that label while pruning extensions that are statistically uninformative. To evaluate this, we treat the log-count and log-rate values for an extension as candidate features 𝑋 , the task label as the target 𝑌 , and measure their dependence using mutual information (MI) 𝐼 (𝑋 ; 𝑌 ). This provides a concrete measure of the predictive signal discussed in Section 3.1, where an extension is informative when its log-count or log-rate values vary systematically with the task label. If these statistics are largely independent of the label, then the extension provides little occurrence-based predictive sig-nal. This use of mutual information is consistent with prior work showing that path-based relational summaries can be informative for prediction [21, 33, 34]. MI is commonly used in supervised feature selection because it quantifies feature-target dependence without requiring a specific predictive model [2, 28]. In our setting, this makes MI a natural task-specific way to assess whether a log-count or log-rate statistic carries useful signal for the corresponding prediction task. MI is also model-agnostic, captures potentially non-linear associations, and is zero if and only if 𝑋 and 𝑌 are independent. We use MI as a cheap proxy for the utility of an extension be-cause directly estimating utility by training a predictive model and monitoring validation error would be prohibitively expensive. For a candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), we would need to train a model using the per-seed-node statistics available up to 𝜋 1: ℎ and obtain its validation error 𝐸 𝜋 1: ℎ . We would also train a model on the extended metapath 𝜋 1: ℎ+1 = 𝜋 1: ℎ ◦𝑒 using the union of the prefix statistics and 

> 6

the new ones introduced by the extension. If the validation error of that model is 𝐸 𝜋 1: ℎ+1 , the utility of candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) can be computed as 𝐸 𝜋 1: ℎ − 𝐸 𝜋 1: ℎ+1 . This procedure would require train-ing many models and is not practical for large relational databases with complex schemas. 

## 8.2 Estimating Mutual Information 

In our setting, MI is not available in closed form since we only ob-serve seed nodes, task labels, and metapath statistics for each batch. We therefore estimate MI from data using standard nonparametric estimators based on 𝑘 -nearest-neighbor distances. We estimate MI separately for log-count and log-rate within each batch of seed nodes. For batch 𝑏 , candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), and statistic 𝑔 ∈ { log-count , log-rate }, let 𝑋 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, 𝑔 ) denote the vec-tor of values of the statistic 𝑔 for the seed nodes in 𝑏 . Let 𝑌 𝑏 denote the corresponding vector of task labels. We estimate a batchwise mutual information between 𝑋 𝑏 and 𝑌 𝑏 , denoted by 𝑀𝐼 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, 𝑔 ).For regression tasks, both 𝑋 𝑏 and 𝑌 𝑏 are continuous, so we use the Kraskov-Stögbauer-Grassberger (KSG) estimator [20], which estimates MI from nearest-neighbor distances and gives higher val-ues when similar feature values tend to correspond to similar label values. For classification tasks, the statistic (log-count or log-rate) is continuous while the task label is discrete, so we use Ross’s mixed discrete-continuous estimator [32]. This estimator applies the same nearest-neighbor idea to the mixed continuous-discrete setting and gives higher values when feature values are more similar within the same class than across different classes. These standard estimators are readily available in libraries such as scikit-learn [27]. 

## 8.3 Entropy-normalized Mutual Information 

The batchwise MI estimates introduced above are not directly com-parable across batches for a given extension because the uncertainty of the task labels can vary from one batch to another. For example, in a classification task, one batch may have a more balanced label distribution than another, while in a regression task, one batch may span a wider range of target values than another. As a result, the same raw MI value can represent different levels of relevance depending on how much label uncertainty is present in that batch. To make MI values comparable across batches, we normalize each batchwise MI by an entropy term, so that the resulting score mea-sures the fraction of label uncertainty explained by the statistic rather than its absolute MI magnitude. This follows the standard information-theoretic view that normalization is needed when MI values are compared across settings with different entropies [37]. We use the empirical entropy of the labels in each batch 𝑏 , com-puted as 𝐻 (𝑌 𝑏 ) = − Í𝑦 𝑝 𝑏 (𝑦 ) ln 𝑝 𝑏 (𝑦 ). The summation is taken differently for classification and regression tasks. For classification tasks, we sum over the different label values 𝑦 in batch 𝑏 . Thus, 

𝑝 𝑏 (𝑦 ) is the frequency of label value 𝑦 in batch 𝑏 normalized by the size of 𝑏 . For regression tasks, the task label is continuous, so we first discretize it into bins. We choose the number of bins and their ranges once from the training data and then use the same bin count for all batches. We use quantile-based binning so that the bins remain populated even for skewed or heavy-tailed targets [6]. After discretization, entropy is computed by taking the summation over the bins. That is, 𝑦 ranges over the bins and 𝑝 𝑏 (𝑦 ) is the number of times bin 𝑦 appears in the batch divided by the batch size. We define the entropy-normalized MI score for batch 𝑏 as NMI 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, 𝑔 ) = 𝑀𝐼 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, 𝑔 )

𝐻 (𝑌 𝑏 ) .

It is possible for 𝐻 (𝑌 𝑏 ) to be zero. This happens when the batch contains no variation in the task label, for example, a batch in a classification task where all seed nodes belong to the same class. In this case, we set NMI 𝑏 for this batch to zero. 

## 8.4 Cost-aware Scoring 

For a given batch, entropy-normalized MI measures how strongly a candidate extension is associated with the task label, but it does not account for how expensive that extension is to sample. In GNN training, computation and memory grow with the size of the sam-pled neighborhood, and high-fanout extensions can quickly lead to neighborhood explosion [1, 15, 42]. We therefore score each candi-date extension in a batch using not only its NMI 𝑏 , but also the cost 

of sampling it, as measured by the number of paths it introduces. We derive the cost of a candidate extension from its log-count values. For a given candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) and a given batch 

𝑏 , the cost is defined as cost 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = avg 𝑠 𝑖 ∈𝑏 

 𝑒 log-count ℎ (𝑠 𝑖 ,𝑡 𝑖 ,𝜋 1: ℎ ) − 1

where 𝑠 𝑖 is a seed node in batch 𝑏 and 𝑡 𝑖 is the corresponding timestamp. The expression within parentheses recovers, for the seed node 𝑠 𝑖 , the actual count of paths for the extension by inverting the equation of log-count. The costs of the extension is then computed as the average of all counts in the batch. Thus, an extension has low cost when it reaches a small number of rows on average and high cost when it creates large expansions. We combine relevance, as measured by NMI 𝑏 , and cost into a single batchwise score. For candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), statistic 

𝑔 ∈ { log-count , log-rate }, and batch 𝑏 , we define score 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, 𝑔 ) = NMI 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, 𝑔 )

cost 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) .

Thus, an extension receives a high score only when it is both label-informative and cheap to sample within the batch, and MetaSieve prunes metapaths with low score values. This follows the same prin-ciple as cost-sensitive feature selection, where a feature is preferred when it is informative yet inexpensive to acquire [13, 26, 35, 36]. 

## 8.5 Coverage as a Measure of Support 

The scores computed in the previous section tell us whether an extension is informative for the task label and whether it is cheap to sample, but they do not tell us how broadly that extension is observed across the training seed nodes. That is, an extension may receive a high score because it behaves well on a small subset of training seed nodes, yet still be observed too infrequently to support a reliable pruning decision. We therefore introduce a third statistic for evaluating extensions, which we call coverage . Unlike log-count and log-rate, coverage is label-agnostic. Its role is to measure how frequently an extension is present in the training data. This is analogous to the notion of support in frequent itemset data mining. 

> 7

For a candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) and a batch 𝑏 , coverage is the fraction of training seed nodes for which the extended frontier is non-empty, and it is computed by recovering 𝑁 ℎ+1 from log-count: coverage 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = 1

|𝑏 |∑︁ 𝑠 𝑖 ∈𝑏 

I 𝑁 ℎ+1 (𝑠 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝜋 1: ℎ ◦ 𝑒 ) > 0.

where 𝑠 𝑖 is a seed node in 𝑏 , 𝑁 ℎ+1 is the count of the candidate extension, I(·) is the indicator function which returns 1 if its ar-gument is true and 0 otherwise. A zero 𝑁 ℎ+1 value indicates that no row was reached for this extension and this seed node, and too many zero 𝑁 ℎ+1 values indicate a low-support metapath. 

## 8.6 Combining the Statistics into a Quality Score 

For every candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), we compute for every batch 

𝑏 = 1 . . . 𝐵 the score for log-count, the score for log-rate, and the coverage. Across the 𝐵 batches, these values form three empirical distributions , which must be combined into a single quality score to determine which metapaths to sample and which to prune. Our approach combines these scores in two steps. First, we sum-marize each of the three distributions as a single number. Next, we combine the three summary numbers into one overall quality score per candidate extension. 

Summarizing Each Distribution. A natural way to summarize the distribution of a statistic is to take the mean. We instead adopt a more conservative summary: a one-sided lower confidence bound 

(LCB) on the mean. The LCB discounts extensions whose perfor-mance appears good only because of a few favorable batches. In this respect, it plays a role analogous to stability-oriented selection criteria, which favor signals that remain strong under repeated subsampling over signals that are only occasionally strong [25]. For any batchwise statistic 𝑧 1, . . . , 𝑧 𝐵 , under a Gaussian i.i.d. as-sumption, the LCB is defined as LCB 𝛿 



{𝑧 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1



= ˆ𝜇 − 𝑡 1−𝛿, 𝐵 −1

ˆ𝜎 

√𝐵 ,

where ˆ 𝜇 and ˆ 𝜎 are the sample mean and standard deviation across batches, and 𝑡 1−𝛿, 𝐵 −1 is the (1 − 𝛿 ) quantile of the Student-𝑡 distri-bution with 𝐵 − 1 degrees of freedom. We use the same significance level 𝛿 for all three statistics (log-count, log-rate, and coverage). The parameter 𝛿 controls how conservative the resulting estimate is, and we tune it for each specific prediction task. For every candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), we compute an LCB for log-count, log-rate, and coverage, e.g., the formula for log-count is LCB 𝛿 



{score 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, log-count )} 𝐵 𝑏 =1



. We remove extensions for which the LCB of coverage is zero, since this occurs only when the extension does not lead to any actual paths in the data. The remaining candidate extensions are grouped by hop, and percentile ranks are computed within each hop. Hop-wise grouping matters because the numerical range of the LCB values shifts with hop depth: paths at deeper hops typically exhibit different fanout behavior, span different attainable count scales, and induce different relevance distributions than shallower ones, making raw LCB values incomparable across hops. To eliminate this scale mismatch while preserving the relative ordering of candidates within each hop, we sort the metapaths at each hop separately by each of the three LCB values and compute the percentile rank of each candidate within each sorted list. Thus, each candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 )

now has three scores on the common scale of [0, 1] summarizing the distribution of each of its three statistics as a single number: 

𝑝 log −count (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = rank %



LCB 𝛿 



{score 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, log-count )} 𝐵 𝑏 =1

 

,𝑝 log −rate (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = rank %



LCB 𝛿 



{score 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, log-rate )} 𝐵 𝑏 =1

 

,𝑝 coverage (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = rank %



LCB 𝛿 



{score 𝑏 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒, coverage )} 𝐵 𝑏 =1

 

.

Computing One Overall Quality Score. As discussed in Section 6.2, a candidate extension can be useful for different reasons. Some extensions are best characterized by the total amount of distinct evidence they expose, which is captured by log-count. Others are better characterized by how strongly they expand relative to the parent frontier, which is captured by log-rate. In practice, an exten-sion is often well represented by one of these two label-dependent statistics, but not necessarily both. We therefore represent the rel-evance of a candidate extension by the stronger of log-count and log-rate. That is, we compute 

𝑝 max (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = max  𝑝 log-count (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), 𝑝 log-rate (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) .

This avoids penalizing an extension simply because one way of looking at relevance is less appropriate for its semantics. We also include coverage in the final score of the candidate extension. Coverage is a measure of support and not a measure of feature-label dependence, but it remains important because even a label-informative extension should not be preferred if it is only present in a small fraction of training seed nodes. Our final quality score for a candidate extension is therefore 

𝑄 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = 𝑝 max (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) + 𝑝 cov (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ).

## 8.7 Separating Promising and Poor Extensions 

MetaSieve should keep candidate extensions with a high quality score 𝑄 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) and prune ones with a low quality score. The ques-tion is where to draw the line separating good and bad extensions. We develop a data-driven process to make this decision. We standardize the 𝑄 values by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. We then use expectation-maximization [24] to fit a two-component Gaussian mixture model to the resulting 𝑄 

values. The component with the larger fitted mean is labeled good ,and the component with the smaller fitted mean is labeled bad .Because the individual relevance and support terms have already been converted into hop-wise percentile ranks, the resulting 𝑄 

values are much better aligned across hops than the raw LCB values. This makes it possible to apply a single global mixture model to the standardized 𝑄 scores while still respecting the different raw scales that arise at different hop depths. 

## 9 GENERATING SAMPLING RULES 

After clustering the candidate extensions into good and bad clusters, the remaining task is to convert these cluster assignments into actionable pruning decisions for neighborhood sampling. We generate a pruning rule for each candidate extension that indicates whether the extension should be kept and expanded or pruned: R ( 𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) ∈ { expand , prune }. For a prefix 𝜋 1: ℎ and candi-date extension 𝑒 , let 𝜋 1: ℎ ◦ 𝑒 denote the corresponding extended 

> 8

metapath. We mark the extension as expand if the extended meta-path is itself assigned to the good cluster, or if it has at least one descendant metapath assigned to the good cluster. Intuitively, even when the immediate extension is not highly ranked, it should be retained if it serves as a gateway to a strong downstream exten-sion. Conversely, we mark the extension as prune only when the extended metapath and all of its descendants lie in the bad cluster. The pruning rules take the form: “after following prefix 𝜋 1: ℎ , do not expand candidate 𝑒 at hop ℎ + 1.” Because a hop ℎ node in the terminal table 𝑇 ℎ may be reachable through multiple schema-valid metapaths from a seed node, implementing these rules require the sampler to track not only the candidate being expanded at hop ℎ

but also the prefix metapath that reached it. Consider, for example, a candidate extension 𝑒 reachable through two prefix metapaths 

𝜋 𝐴  

> 1: ℎ

and 𝜋 𝐵  

> 1: ℎ

, with R ( 𝜋 𝐴 

> 1: ℎ

, 𝑒 ) = expand and R ( 𝜋 𝐵 

> 1: ℎ

, 𝑒 ) = prune .The decision whether to expand (i.e., sample neighbors) depends on which of the two prefix metapaths was traversed to reach 𝑒 .If the neighborhood sampler used in the GNN training frame-work tracks at runtime the prefix used to reach a node while sam-pling, the pruning rules can be implemented directly in the sampler. However, standard frameworks do not track prefixes while sam-pling. For example, MetaSieve uses the popular PyG library [11, 12], whose sampler allows the user to specify the extensions to sample and the number of samples per extension type at each hop, but does not track the prefix used to reach each hop. As a result, it cannot distinguish between the two cases described above. To bridge this gap, we approximate the prefix-aware pruning rules with prefix-agnostic rules of the form: “if a node at hop ℎ

belongs to the terminal table 𝑇 ℎ of the prefix metapath 𝜋 1: ℎ of a rule, do not expand candidate 𝑒 at hop ℎ + 1.” That is, ignore the specific prefix used to reach 𝑇 ℎ . To specify that a candidate not be expanded, we instruct PyG to sample zero neighbors for that candidate at hop 

ℎ, leaving the default sampling unchanged for other extensions. Under this approximation, if the terminal table of prefix 𝜋 1: ℎ is reachable through multiple prefixes and even one of them carries a rule R ( 𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = prune , the extension 𝑒 is pruned. We also experi-mented with alternative approximations that aggregate the rules associated with all prefixes reaching the terminal table of 𝜋 1: ℎ —for example, pruning only when a majority of these rules indicate pruning — and found that our simple approximation works best. 

## 10 EXPERIMENTS 10.1 Experimental Setup 

10.1.1 Datasets and Tasks. We evaluate MetaSieve on the RelBench benchmark, which provides realistic databases, temporally scoped predictive tasks, and standardized training/validation/test splits with task-specific metrics [31]. Our evaluation focuses on node-level classification and regression tasks , which are the two settings supported by our metapath pruning pipeline. We use five RelBench databases with complex schemas and large instances: 

> rel-ratebeer

, rel-trial , rel-f1 , rel-stack , and rel-avito .We select these databases because their schemas admit many valid metapaths and contain highly connected tables, making meta-path selection both useful and computationally challenging. Simpler schemas, such as rel-amazon , provide few to no meaningful prun-ing choices. Together, the five databases span different application domains, schema structures, task semantics, database sizes, and connectivity patterns, providing a diverse and comprehensive eval-uation of MetaSieve. The number of rows in the databases ranges from ~100K for rel-f1 to ~21M for rel-avito . The rel-ratebeer 

database was introduced in RelBench v2 [14] and is the largest of our test databases by data size, despite being second-largest by row count (~14M rows). These datasets provide a challenging evaluation setting for meta-path pruning because they combine diverse prediction tasks with schemas that allow many valid metapath sequences. 

10.1.2 Hardware and Software Environment. Our implementation uses DuckDB [29] v1.2.0 as the DBMS. All MetaSieve workers run as threads within the same Python process, and each worker uses its own private, embedded in-memory DuckDB instance, with each instance having multiple query execution threads (8 threads per worker by default). The shared database is attached to each DuckDB instance in read-only mode. Each worker gets a memory limit of 

𝑀 worker = 0.65 𝑀 available /𝑊 , where 𝑀 available is the available system memory and 𝑊 is the number of workers. We use Pytorch with the Pytorch Geometric (PyG) library v2.6.1 as the sampling and GNN framework. All experiments were con-ducted on a GPU cluster with H100 NVIDIA GPUs with 80 GB of memory each and AMD CPUs. Each experiment uses 1 GPU and 2 TB of RAM. The NVIDIA driver is v570.172.08 and CUDA is v12.8. 

10.1.3 Sampling Strategies. We compare MetaSieve to two other strategies for constructing the training subgraph for each seed node. 

Random 𝑚 -hop sampling. Starting from the seed node, expand the frontier for 𝑚 successive hops. At each hop, every frontier node draws a uniform sample of its neighbors with a fixed fanout applied identically across all edge types and hops [15]. This is the default sampling strategy for GNN training, and it is metapath-agnostic: it makes no distinction among the relational paths it traverses. 

MPS-GNN. MPS-GNN [8] is the state-of-the-art in metapath selec-tion for RDL. We use the implementation provided by the authors, adapting it to the much larger RelBench databases. MPS-GNN is designed for binary node classification and was originally evalu-ated on simpler databases without a temporal dimension. To scale MPS-GNN to the more complex and temporal RelBench databases, we first draw a small label-balanced subset of training seed nodes, together with a small validation subset, and then construct a single temporally consistent 𝐻 -hop sampled subgraph around those seeds. We pass this sampled subgraph, together with the classification labels of the seeds, to the MPS-GNN search routine. The search is constrained by two parameters: 𝑘 , which keeps only the top-𝑘 

candidate extensions at each step, and beam_width , which caps the number of partial metapaths retained after each expansion round. These constraints are essential in practice, since increasing either parameter quickly expands the number of explored metapaths, lead-ing to a sharp increase in search time even for small databases. The metapaths evaluated by this search are ranked, and our default is to retain the top 20 and prune the rest, ensuring sufficient data cov-erage. If MPS-GNN evaluates fewer than 20 metapaths, we retain them all. We also investigate the effect of evaluating and retaining more metapaths in Section 10.4. 

> 9

10.1.4 GNN Backbones. The sampling strategies can be applied to any GNN backbone. We evaluate them with three backbone models that represent message-passing and transformer-based architec-tures. These are also the backbones used in [5]. 

HeteroGraphSAGE. This is a heterogeneous version of the Graph-SAGE [15] message-passing GNN, and it is the default backbone in the RelBench [31] implementation. It extends GraphSAGE to multiple node and edge types by performing neighbor aggregation per edge type and combining the resulting messages to form the up-dated embedding. Thus, each edge type contributes through its own transformation before being merged into a single representation. 

HGT. The Heterogeneous Graph Transformer (HGT) [17] replaces fixed neighborhood aggregation with attention-based message pass-ing. HGT learns separate transformations for different node types when computing attention, and separate relation-specific parame-ters for different edge types when passing messages. This means that, when updating a node, the model can assign different impor-tance to neighbors depending on both their node type and the type of relation connecting them. As a result, HGT can model heteroge-neous structure more flexibly than HeteroGraphSAGE while still operating as a message-passing model. 

RelGT. The Relational Graph Transformer (RelGT) [5] is a recently introduced state-of-the-art backbone specifically designed for RDL, and it shows superior accuracy for RelBench tasks. For each seed node, RelGT samples a local subgraph and selects a fixed set of 𝑘 

neighboring nodes to form the input token set. Each selected node is represented by a multi-element token encoding its features, type, hop distance, time, and local structure. RelGT then combines local self-attention over these sampled tokens with global attention via learnable centroid tokens, allowing it to capture both neighborhood-level and database-wide patterns. 

10.1.5 Hyperparameters. We train the GNNs for 10, 20, or 30 epochs, depending on the dataset size and the GNN complexity. For a given dataset, each GNN backbone is trained for the same number of epochs across all sampling strategies, ensuring a fair comparison among the strategies. For experiments configured to run more than 10 epochs, we apply early stopping based on improvement in the validation metric. The neighborhood sampling fanout is set to 64 at every hop in all experiments, except for RelGT on large tasks such as beer-churn and post-votes , where we use a fanout of 16 to control training cost. The number of GNN layers is always matched to the number of sampled hops for message passing models. In MetaSieve, the 𝛿 hyperparameter controls the strength of the uncertainty penalty in the LCB estimates used to aggregate log-count, log-rate, and coverage. Smaller 𝛿 values produce a larger subtraction term in the LCB formula and hence a more conservative estimate that more strongly penalizes extensions with high batch-to-batch variability. The 𝛿 value has to be below 0 .5, so for each experiment we choose the best 𝛿 from {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4}.

10.1.6 Summary of Experiments. Section 10.2 shows that MetaSieve consistently improves training time for all GNN backbones. We also show that this improvement in training time does not come at the cost of reduced accuracy. On the contrary, the most accurate model overall is the powerful RelGT backbone with MetaSieve for meta-path selection. Section 10.3 shows that MetaSieve preprocessing time is very reasonable, while MPS-GNN is prohibitively expensive. The remaining experiments focus on sensitivity analysis and ablations. In Section 10.4, we show that retaining more of the meta-paths selected by MPS-GNN (30 instead of 20) requires higher pre-processing time and results in higher epoch times during training, while not adding substantially to accuracy. Thus, our choice of retaining 20 metapaths for MPS-GNN is well-justified. Next, we turn our attention to the internals of MetaSieve. In Section 10.5, we show ablations over the scoring function and demonstrate that all of its components are necessary. We study the process of tuning the hyperparameter 𝛿 in Section 10.6, and we show that this hyperparameter has an effect on accuracy and time per epoch, but MetaSieve is not overly sensitive to the choice of 

𝛿 to the point of requiring unrealistic effort to tune this hyperpa-rameter. Section 10.7 compares the prefix-agnostic heuristic we use to generate sampling rules (Section 9) with prefix-aware versions and shows that the prefix-aware versions result in less metapath pruning and higher epoch times (as expected), but they do not add substantial accuracy, thus justifying our prefix-agnostic heuristic. Finally, we end with a comprehensive scalability analysis of the SQL queries used by MetaSieve in Section 10.8. We show that the memory required to materialize the frontier grows linearly with frontier size. However, this memory can be regulated by reducing the number of worker threads, increasing the number of seed-node batches (thus reducing batch size), and/or limiting the memory available to DuckDB and requiring it to spill to disk. Regulating the memory consumed by SQL queries as the database grows is very well supported in a modern DBMS, and MetaSieve takes full advantage of this capability to ensure scalability. 

## 10.2 Improvement in GNN Training 

Tables 1 and 2 present the main experimental results of this pa-per. Table 1 reports test accuracy and per-epoch training time for the RelBench node classification tasks across the five databases in our evaluation, covering all three GNN backbones paired with the three sampling strategies. Table 2 reports the same metrics for node regression tasks, but includes only random sampling and MetaSieve, since MPS-GNN does not support node regression, a significant limitation relative to MetaSieve .

Training time. Since the primary goal of MetaSieve is to reduce training time, we first examine per-epoch time. Both MPS-GNN and MetaSieve reduce training time compared to random neigh-borhood sampling, since they sample smaller subgraphs. However, MetaSieve delivers substantially larger gains on all tasks, with the exception of a few cases on rel-stack where the metapaths se-lected by MPS-GNN results in smaller subgraphs. Thus, we conclude that MetaSieve achieves the fastest per-epoch time, yielding substantial savings over both MPS-GNN and random neigh-borhood sampling. The speedup from MetaSieve can exceed 10 ×,for example, on the beer-churn task with the powerful RelGT backbone. This speedup reduces training time from days to hours. 

Test accuracy. The training-time gains from MetaSieve and MPS-GNN do not come at the cost of accuracy. In fact, these sampling strategies often improve accuracy, because the pruned metapaths                                                                                                                                                                                            

> 10 Dataset Task Name GNN Architecture Random MPS-GNN MetaSieve (ours) Test ↑Time/epoch ↓Test ↑Time/epoch ↓Test ↑Time/epoch ↓
> rel-ratebeer user-churn HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.923 1,397 0.949 332 0.951 160 HGT (3 hop) 0.875 3,781 0.894 1,010 0.875 721 RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.933 9,742 0.942 2,443 0.953 1,253 rel-ratebeer beer-churn HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.784 3,103 0.814 1,554 0.785 518 HGT (3 hop) 0.740 11,181 0.719 5,823 0.725 1,299 RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.777 17,644 0.780 11,102 0.799 1,494 rel-trial study-outcome HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.648 16 0.668 80.660 5HGT (3 hop) 0.552 22 0.597 16 0.569 11 RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.691 146 0.676 119 0.702 97 rel-f1 driver-dnf HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.712 27 0.676 17 0.723 6HGT (3 hop) 0.661 41 0.508 26 0.672 11 RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.675 624 0.681 331 0.736 115 rel-f1 driver-top3 HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.797 60.774 50.779 2HGT (3 hop) 0.666 90.695 80.673 4RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.681 141 0.750 123 0.766 29 rel-stack user-badge HeteroGraphSAGE (4 hop) 0.891 699 0.885 314 0.889 185 HGT (4 hop) 0.854 818 0.854 425 0.852 234 RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.878 3,808 0.877 2,720 0.877 3,063 rel-stack user-engagement HeteroGraphSAGE (4 hop) 0.907 1,434 0.904 182 0.906 209 HGT (4 hop) 0.851 1,846 0.845 221 0.876 248 RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.904 4,636 0.901 3,368 0.905 3,697 rel-avito user-visits HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.660 52 0.662 35 0.661 18 HGT (3 hop) 0.626 70 0.632 45 0.635 25 RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.654 924 0.653 663 0.661 427 rel-avito user-clicks HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.678 68 0.669 30 0.669 16 HGT (3 hop) 0.648 55 0.633 33 0.660 17 RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.649 742 0.640 565 0.670 325

Table 1: Node classification performance. Evaluation metric is AUCROC (higher is better). Epoch time is in seconds (lower is better). The fastest time/epoch is highlighted in green, and the best test metrics are in bold. 

are typically uninformative, so removing them from the training data yields a more accurate GNN. This effect is more pronounced for RelGT than for HeteroGraphSAGE and HGT. HeteroGraphSAGE and HGT are weaker GNN architectures and cannot fully exploit the improved training data produced by metapath selection. RelGT, in contrast, is a powerful GNN architecture designed specifically for RDL, and is therefore better positioned to leverage higher-quality training data. Specifically, RelGT is a transformer model trained on a fixed-size context window populated with tokens from sampled subgraphs. Metapath selection fills this window with higher-quality tokens. A clear takeaway from Tables 1 and 2 is that the powerful RelGT backbone combined with MetaSieve metapath selec-tion consistently achieves the highest accuracy. 

## 10.3 Preprocessing Time for Metapath Selection 

Table 3 reports the preprocessing time of MetaSieve. For each task, the table lists the number of training samples (seed nodes) and the number of batches 𝐵 into which they are divided. The SQL queries are parallelized into worker threads, and the number of workers is also listed. The next two columns give the time spent in SQL pro-cessing and the total preprocessing. SQL processing dominates, and the remaining steps (computing statistics, scoring metapaths, and generating rules) take only 5–36 seconds. To place these numbers in context, the final column shows the preprocessing time divided by the average epoch time for training the RelGT backbone with random neighborhood sampling on the same task. We use RelGT be-cause it is the strongest backbone in our experiments, and random neighborhood sampling because it is the baseline that MetaSieve is designed to improve upon. The results in this last column are strik-ing: the substantial gains in training time and test accuracy delivered by MetaSieve are obtained at a preprocessing cost of only a fraction of one epoch. 

Table 4 reports the corresponding preprocessing time for MPS-GNN, restricted to classification tasks since MPS-GNN does not support regression. The first two columns list the number of train-ing and validation samples used. We deliberately keep these sample sizes small as MPS-GNN trains a separate GNN at every decision 

> 11

Dataset Task Name GNN Architecture Random MetaSieve (ours) Test ↓ Time/epoch ↓ Test ↓ Time/epoch ↓

rel-ratebeer user-count HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 7.991 890 7.651 220 HGT(3 hop) 12.431 3,740 14.447 736 RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 8.387 2,086 7.960 900 rel-trial study-adverse HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 44.420 29 44.727 15 HGT (3 hop) 57.379 80 57.118 45 RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 46.012 388 44.984 225 rel-trial site-success HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.391 105 0.437 49 HGT (3 hop) 0.462 410 0.462 124 RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.394 1,720 0.369 744 rel-f1 driver-position HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 4.973 14 4.317 4HGT (3 hop) 4.641 65 4.103 4RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 4.238 410 4.110 84 rel-stack post-votes HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.065 1,084 0.065 442 HGT (3 hop) 0.068 1,205 0.068 506 RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.068 9,233 0.068 4,824 rel-avito ad-ctr HeteroGraphSAGE (3 hop) 0.042 8 0.042 3HGT (3 hop) 0.043 8 0.044 4RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.039 152 0.038 104 

Table 2: Node regression performance. Evaluation metric is MAE (lower is better). Epoch time is in seconds (lower is better). The fastest time/epoch is highlighted in green, and the best test metrics are in bold.                                                                                              

> Dataset Task Name Train Samples Batch Count SQL Workers SQL Time Total Time Seconds Epochs rel-ratebeer user-churn 300,000 32 4638 649 0.07 beer-churn 300,000 32 42318 2340 0.13 user-count 300,000 32 4652 669 0.32 rel-trial study-outcome 11,994 88510 0.07 study-adverse 43,335 8811 17 0.04 site-success 151,407 8810 16 0.01 rel-f1 driver-dnf 11,411 88611 0.02 driver-top3 1,353 88380.06 driver-position 7,453 88511 0.03 rel-stack user-badge 363,048 32 831 55 0.02 user-engagement 168,020 32 824 35 0.01 post-votes 407,416 32 8310 345 0.04 rel-avito user-visits 86,619 16 4304 312 0.34 user-clicks 59,454 16 4267 274 0.37 ad-ctr 5,100 8854 59 0.39

Table 3: Time for MetaSieve to complete preprocessing and generate the required sampling configuration (hops = 3 for all tasks). SQL Time is in seconds. Total Time is reported in seconds, and as a fraction of the epoch time for RelGT with random neighborhood sampling for the same task. 

step, and reducing the sample size is necessary to keep its running time tractable. The next two columns report the total preprocess-ing time, both in seconds and as a multiple of the average RelGT epoch time with random sampling on the same task. The remaining columns are discussed in the next section. Despite using far fewer samples than MetaSieve, MPS-GNN is substantially slower, taking up to 45 epochs. We train the GNN on the selected metapaths for at most 30 epochs, so a metapath selection procedure that can itself exceed this budget offers little practical value. In short, MPS-GNN is too slow to be a viable choice in our setting .

## 10.4 Retaining More Metapaths in MPS-GNN 

To make sure that we are fair to MPS-GNN in our experiments, we evaluate whether our choice of retaining only the top 20 metapaths it selects puts it at a disadvantage. In this section, we study the performance of MPS-GNN if we increase the number of evaluated metapaths and retain the top 30. MPS-GNN does not provide direct control over the number of metapaths evaluated because this number depends on the available schema traversals and the candidates retained during the search at each hop. However, increasing the search specific parameters 𝑘 and  

> beam_width

broadens the search and evaluates more metapaths. Our default setting uses 𝑘 = 3 and beam_width = 6. We increase these values to 𝑘 = 6 and beam_width = 15 to increase the like-lihood that at least 30 metapaths are evaluated. We retain the 30 highest scoring metapaths from the latter setting. First, we study how this broader exploration affects preprocess-ing time. Table 4 shows both the default search setting in which we retain 20 metapaths and the broader setting in which we retain 30 metapaths. For each setting, the table shows the preprocessing time in seconds and as a multiple of the RelGT epoch time. The table also shows the number of metapaths evaluated by MPS-GNN in both settings, confirming that this number is near or above 20 in the first setting and always equal or above 30 in the second. Thus, the second setting has more than 30 metapaths that are evaluated                                                                                         

> 12 Dataset Task Name Train Samples Val Samples Config ( 𝑘 =3, beam_width=6) Config ( 𝑘 =6, beam_width=15) Total Time Paths Evaluated Total Time Paths Evaluated Seconds Epochs Seconds Epochs rel-ratebeer user-churn 500 120 3,532 0.27 22 3,790 0.39 30 beer-churn 500 120 7,922 0.45 26 11,257 0.64 51 rel-trial study-outcome 720 192 6,573 45.02 19 10,126 69.36 56 rel-f1 driver-dnf 720 192 9,268 14.85 29 11,606 18.60 33 driver-top3 500 130 6,405 45.43 29 8,644 61.30 33 rel-stack user-badge 720 192 6,884 1.81 24 7,077 1.86 72 user-engagement 720 192 10,092 2.18 24 11,732 2.53 79 rel-avito user-visits 700 180 2,488 2.69 25 2,511 2.72 31 user-clicks 720 192 3,516 4.74 26 4,171 5.62 33

Table 4: MPS-GNN search through hop 3 under the default ( 𝑘 = 3, beam_width=6) configuration and an alternative ( 𝑘 = 6,beam_width=15) configuration that produces more than 30 paths. Total Time is reported in seconds and as a multiple of the RelGT epoch time with random sampling. Paths Evaluated reports the number of metapaths evaluated during search.                                                                                         

> Dataset Task Name GNN Architecture MPS-GNN (top 20) MPS-GNN (top 30) MetaSieve Test ↑Time/epoch ↓Test ↑Time/epoch ↓Test ↑Time/epoch ↓
> rel-ratebeer user-churn RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.942 2,443 0.933 6,132 0.953 1,253 rel-ratebeer beer-churn RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.780 11,102 0.793 14,070 0.799 1,494 rel-trial study-outcome RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.676 119 0.705 137 0.702 97 rel-f1 driver-dnf RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.681 331 0.774 528 0.736 115 rel-f1 driver-top3 RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.750 123 0.744 124 0.819 32 rel-stack user-badge RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.877 2,720 0.880 3,619 0.877 3,063 rel-stack user-engagement RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.901 3,368 0.904 4,423 0.905 3,697 rel-avito user-visits RelGT (3 hop, k=100) 0.653 663 0.655 868 0.661 427 rel-avito user-clicks RelGT (3 hop, k=50) 0.640 565 0.663 791 0.670 325

Table 5: Node classification performance when MPS-GNN retains the top 20 and top 30 paths compared with MetaSieve. Evaluation metric is AUCROC (higher is better). Epoch time is in seconds (lower is better). The fastest time/epoch is highlighted in green, and the best test metrics are in bold. 

and scored by MPS-GNN, from which we can meaningfully select the top 30. However, the broader search for metapaths further in-creases MPS-GNN’s already high preprocessing time, sometimes substantially (e.g., rel-trial ). As expected, exploring and retain-ing more metapaths puts MPS-GNN at an even higher disadvantage to MetaSieve in terms of preprocessing cost. The next question we ask is whether this increased preprocess-ing cost improves training. Table 5 shows the Test AUCROC and Time/Epoch for all classification tasks using the RelGT backbone. We compare MPS-GNN when retaining both top 20 and 30 meta-paths, and MetaSieve. Retaining 30 metapaths with MPS-GNN in-stead of 20 leads to larger sampled subgraphs, which increases time per epoch, sometimes by a large factor as in the user-churn task. This increase in training time is expected. The question is whether it leads to a more accurate model. Here, the answer is mixed. On one task, driver-dnf , retaining 30 metapaths substantially increases the test accuracy of MPS-GNN, making it the most accurate strategy by a good margin, albeit the most expensive. On every other task, retaining 30 metapaths yields only a moderate gain in accuracy for MPS-GNN, or even a degradation ( user-churn and driver-top3 ). Thus, our default of retaining the top 20 metapaths selected by MPS-GNN does not place it at a disadvantage. On the contrary, in our view, it strikes a good balance between preprocessing and training time on one hand, and model accuracy on the other. 

## 10.5 Ablations on the Scoring Function 𝑄 

Next, we turn our attention to the internal hyperparameters of MetaSieve. In this section, we present ablation studies on the scor-ing function 𝑄 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ). In the next two sections, we examine hy-perparameter 𝛿 and the heuristic used to generate sampling rules. All our ablation studies use the RelGT backbone on the same three databases: rel-trial , rel-f1 , and rel-avito .                                                  

> 13 Dataset Task Name MetaSieve Random Pruning Test Time/ epoch Test Time/ epoch rel-trial study-outcome (cls ↑)0.702 97 0.675 162 study-adverse (reg ↓)44.984 225 46.566 345 site-success (reg ↓)0.369 744 0.447 1,527 rel-f1 driver-dnf (cls ↑)0.736 115 0.703 149 driver-top3 (cls ↑)0.766 29 0.795 31 driver-position (reg ↓)4.110 84 4.584 98 rel-avito user-visits (cls ↑)0.661 427 0.647 529 user-clicks (cls ↑)0.670 325 0.643 379 ad-ctr (reg ↓)0.038 104 0.040 110

Table 6: MetaSieve vs. random pruning using the same num-ber of pruning rules starting from hop 2. All experiments use the RelGT backbone. For classification tasks (cls ↑), the test metric is AUCROC. For regression tasks (reg ↓), the test metric is MAE. Time/epoch is in seconds. 

The first ablation study on 𝑄 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) asks whether this scoring function is necessary at all: MetaSieve uses 𝑄 to decide which meta-paths to prune, and we ask whether pruning the same number of metapaths uniformly at random would achieve comparable results. For each task, let 𝑛 denote the number of pruning rules produced by MetaSieve. We randomly generate exactly 𝑛 rules by choosing 𝑛 

schema-valid (prefix, candidate extension) pairs from the set pro-duced by schema-guided metapath enumeration (Section 5). As in MetaSieve, we begin pruning only from hop 2 onward, so random pruning has the same opportunity to remove extensions at the same stages of the search space. Table 6 reports the results. Random pruning is consistently inferior to MetaSieve in both accuracy and training time, confirming the need for MetaSieve’s scoring. The second ablation study asks whether all components of the formula for 𝑄 are necessary. Recall that 

𝑄 (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = max  𝑝 log-count (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), 𝑝 log-rate (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) + 𝑝 cov (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ).

We compare the full scoring function against three simpler variants that score extensions using only 𝑝 log-count , only 𝑝 log-rate , or only 𝑝 cov .Table 7 reports the results (using RelGT). While individual compo-nents are occasionally competitive, the full formula consistently produces the best accuracy, confirming the need for all components. 

## 10.6 Tuning Hyperparameter 𝛿 

Recall from Section 8.6 that the hyperparameter 𝛿 controls the LCB computation and hence the score 𝑄 . This affects the metapath exten-sions in the good vs. bad cluster produced by the GMM (Section 8.7). To choose 𝛿 for a task, we train the GNN by pruning metapaths using rules generated with 𝛿 ∈ { 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4} and evaluate on the validation split of the data. Table 8 shows the results. In some tasks, changing 𝛿 modifies the candidate scores of the metapaths and their ranking but leaves the GMM split unchanged. That is, the same extensions end up in the good and bad clusters, and the same extensions are therefore pruned. This can be seen in Ta-ble 8 in the form of relatively unchanging time per epoch and valida-tion accuracy, as observed for study-adverse and user-clicks .For other tasks, increasing 𝛿 moves borderline extensions across the GMM boundary, thus changing the good and bad clusters. If the bad cluster shrinks, fewer metapaths are pruned and time per epoch increases, as seen for site-success at 𝛿 = 0.40. The opposite can also occur. If the bad cluster grows, more metapaths are pruned and time per epoch decreases, as illustrated by driver-top3 going from 𝛿 = 0.10 to 𝛿 = 0.20 /0.30. This effect is not monotonic because the hop wise percentile normalization and GMM clustering depend on the relative separation between candidate extensions rather than only on their absolute LCB values. We select a task-specific 𝛿 using validation accuracy as the pri-mary criterion and time per epoch as the secondary criterion when the validation results are close. Table 8 shows the selected 𝛿 for each task. In most cases, we select the 𝛿 value with the best validation accuracy, but in some cases we accept a small degradation in accu-racy when it provides a substantial reduction in training time. For example, study-outcome uses 𝛿 = 0.40 instead of 𝛿 = 0.20, while  

> user-visits

uses 𝛿 = 0.10 instead of 𝛿 = 0.30. When all tested 𝛿 

values produce the same pruning rules, so the task is insensitive to 

𝛿 , we choose 𝛿 = 0.40. Overall, 𝛿 affects pruning and performance for some tasks. How-ever, MetaSieve is not overly sensitive to the choice of 𝛿 to the point of requiring unreasonable effort in tuning this hyperparameter. Ob-taining the best performance requires tuning 𝛿 , but it would not be unreasonable to use a default of, say, 𝛿 = 0.2 for all tasks. 

## 10.7 Prefix-aware Sampling Rules 

As discussed in Section 9, a candidate extension 𝑒 in a prefix-aware rule at hop ℎ for prefix 𝜋 1: ℎ may also be reachable through other prefixes ending at the same terminal table. Since PyG does not track the prefix used to reach a node, the rule for 𝑒 at hop ℎ is applied to all such prefixes. We examine how often this causes overpruning .Specifically, for each hop and terminal table appearing in the prun-ing rules, we check all schema-valid prefixes that can reach that terminal table and compare them with the prefixes present in the rules. If all such prefixes are present, applying the prefix-agnostic rule does not introduce additional pruning. If some prefixes are missing, the rule may prune 𝑒 when the terminal table is reached through those missing prefixes, which we refer to as overpruning. We start with the non-problematic cases. For all tasks on the  

> rel-trial

dataset up to three hops, each affected terminal table is reachable through only one prefix, so no conflict between prefixes is possible. Tasks on rel-avito and rel-ratebeer often have multiple prefixes reaching the same terminal table, but all prefixes are represented in the pruning rules, so they all agree on pruning the extension. The same is true for the rel-f1/driver-top3 task. In all these cases, no overpruning is possible. We now turn to cases where overpruning occurs. In the  

> rel-f1/driver-dnf

and rel-f1/driver-position tasks, one of the two prefixes reaching the constructors table at hop 2 is missing from the pruning rules, so constructors rows reachable through this prefix are overpruned. Overpruning is more common in the rel-stack dataset because its schema allows many metap-aths to converge on the same terminal table. The number of prefix metapaths missing from the pruning rules is small at three hops but becomes larger at four hops as the number of valid metapaths grows. We observe this pattern across the user-badge , user-engagement ,

> 14

Dataset Task Name MetaSieve Formula Only Count Only Rate Only Coverage Test Time/epoch Test Time/epoch Test Time/epoch Test Time/epoch rel-trial study-outcome (cls ↑) 0.702 97 0.678 94 0.686 95 0.675 97 study-adverse (reg ↓) 44.984 225 45.464 216 45.759 224 45.967 218 site-success (reg ↓) 0.369 744 0.386 663 0.374 679 0.440 1,386 rel-f1 driver-dnf (cls ↑) 0.736 115 0.726 182 0.706 109 0.699 99 driver-top3 (cls ↑) 0.766 29 0.675 45 0.800 39 0.728 29 driver-position (reg ↓) 4.110 84 3.974 84 3.985 83 3.958 78 rel-avito user-visits (cls ↑) 0.661 427 0.654 490 0.659 477 0.653 824 user-clicks (cls ↑) 0.670 325 0.649 371 0.651 372 0.615 619 ad-ctr (reg ↓) 0.038 104 0.039 111 0.038 112 0.039 102 

Table 7: Effect of different components of the formula for 𝑄 . All experiments use the RelGT backbone. For classification tasks (cls ↑), the test metric is AUCROC. For regression tasks (reg ↓), the test metric is MAE. Time/epoch is in seconds. 

Dataset Task Name 

𝛿 = 0.10 𝛿 = 0.20 𝛿 = 0.30 𝛿 = 0.40 Selected 

𝛿 

Val Time/epoch Val Time/epoch Val Time/epoch Val Time/epoch rel-trial study-outcome (cls ↑) 0.670 109 0.670 108 0.647 97 0.665 97 0.40 study-adverse (reg ↓) 47.486 225 47.878 222 47.685 225 47.534 225 0.40 site-success (reg ↓) 0.379 743 0.369 744 0.382 732 0.380 1,547 0.20 rel-f1 driver-dnf (cls ↑) 0.769 100 0.750 111 0.763 116 0.782 115 0.40 driver-top3 (cls ↑) 0.741 55 0.856 30 0.881 29 0.820 32 0.30 driver-position (reg ↓) 3.094 84 3.349 86 3.580 85 3.222 104 0.10 rel-avito user-visits (cls ↑) 0.687 427 0.689 705 0.691 676 0.690 675 0.10 user-clicks (cls ↑) 0.634 325 0.639 326 0.637 323 0.637 325 0.40 ad-ctr (reg ↓) 0.034 106 0.035 105 0.033 104 0.034 104 0.40 

Table 8: Validation performance for different tasks across a range of values of hyperparameter 𝛿 . All experiments use the RelGT backbone. For classification tasks (cls ↑), the metric is AUCROC. For regression tasks (reg ↓), the metric is MAE.                                                                                                         

> Dataset Task Name GNN Architecture Hop Default Heuristic Majority Heuristic Unanimous Heuristic Test Time/epoch ↓
> No. of Rules Test Time/epoch ↓
> No. of Rules Test Time/epoch ↓
> No. of Rules rel-f1 driver-dnf (cls ↑)RelGT (k=100) 30.736 115 10 0.701 189 70.701 189 7rel-f1 driver-position (reg ↓)RelGT (k=100) 34.110 84 11 4.005 134 74.005 134 7rel-stack user-badge (cls ↑)HeteroGraphSAGE 40.889 185 129 0.890 207 122 0.890 236 58 rel-stack user-badge (cls ↑)RelGT (k=50) 30.877 3,063 23 0.877 3,063 23 0.901 3,508 1rel-stack user-engagement (cls ↑)HeteroGraphSAGE 40.906 209 172 0.907 214 166 0.907 217 151 rel-stack user-engagement (cls ↑)RelGT (k=50) 30.905 3,697 23 0.905 3,812 21 0.904 4,636 0rel-stack post-votes (reg ↓)RelGT (k=50) 30.068 4,824 23 0.068 8,371 40.068 8,371 4

Table 9: Performance under different heuristics for generating sampling rules. For classification tasks (cls ↑), the test metric is AUCROC. For regression tasks (reg ↓), the test metric is MAE. Time/epoch is in seconds. The number of pruning rules decreases as the heuristic becomes less aggressive in recommending pruning. 

and post-votes tasks, showing that overpruning is more likely in highly connected schemas and at greater hop depths. To measure the practical effect of overpruning, Table 9 com-pares three heuristics for generating sampling rules. The first is the 

> 15

default, prefix-agnostic heuristic of MetaSieve, which prunes an extension if it appears in the pruning rules with any of the prefixes leading to it, regardless of how many prefixes are missing from the pruning rules. We contrast this with two less aggressive heuristics, which we call majority and unanimous . The majority heuristic re-tains a sampling rule generated by the default heuristic for a hop and terminal table only when the number of prefixes reaching this table at this hop in the MetaSieve pruning rules is greater than the number of prefixes missing from the pruning rules. That is, a majority of the prefix metapaths reaching an extension recom-mends pruning this extension. The unanimous heuristic retains a sampling rule generated by the default heuristic only when every prefix is present in the pruning rules. Table 9 reports the number of sampling rules under each heuristic. Note that the rules under unanimous are a subset of the rules under majority, which in turn are a subset of the rules under default. Table 9 also shows the test accuracy and per-epoch time when using the different heuristics. The table shows results for two  

> rel-stack

tasks with 4 hops, since overpruning becomes a greater problem with higher hop counts. In contrast to the other rows, which use RelGT as a backbone, these two rows use HeteroGraph-SAGE since training RelGT for 4 hops is prohibitively expensive. The results show that reducing overpruning by using less aggres-sive heuristics does not improve predictive accuracy. The majority and unanimous heuristics perform slightly better than the default heuristic in a few cases and worse in some, but the key takeaway is that differences in accuracy are minimal. This suggests that the GNNs are robust to the structural information that the default heuristic loses. The clearer effect is on training cost. The less aggres-sive heuristics retain additional graph structure, producing larger sampled neighborhoods and slower epochs. Overall, the default, prefix-agnostic heuristic provides the strongest balance between predictive accuracy and training efficiency. In summary, the prefix-agnostic heuristic used by MetaSieve to generate sampling rules introduces no overpruning in most task and hop settings. Overpruning is most noticeable in highly connected schemas, such as rel-stack , and at deeper hop counts. Even in these cases, retaining more structure through the majority or unani-mous heuristics changes predictive performance only slightly while increasing training time. This shows that the MetaSieve heuristic is a practical choice. 

## 10.8 Scalability of SQL Operations 

MetaSieve uses SQL operations (queries and create table statements) to create the data used in metapath selection, and in this section, we study the scalability of these operations as the database workload increases. MetaSieve performs two main SQL operations for each candidate extension: frontier materialization followed by aggrega-tion on the frontier to compute per-seed log-count and log-rate statistics. We focus our scalability analysis on frontier materializa-tion because this is where a candidate extension can substantially increase the number of intermediate rows. When an extension en-ters a dense or high-fanout region of the database, a relatively small parent frontier can expand into a very large child frontier, increas-ing memory pressure. In contrast, aggregation to compute statistics reduces an already materialized frontier; although it contributes to preprocessing time, it does not create the frontier expansion itself. Thus, MetaSieve must control frontier-induced memory pressure to scale reliably on large, highly connected databases. As the database size grows, the time and memory required for frontier materialization both grow. Table 3 shows that this time is small, a fraction of an epoch, even for large databases such as  

> rel-ratebeer

and rel-avito . In this section, we study the mem-ory required for frontier materialization by profiling the memory growth of candidate-extension queries in different settings. This enables us to answer the following questions: How much memory is required for frontier materialization? Can the amount of memory be regulated? How does regulating memory affect execution time? We focus on the largest databases in Table 3: rel-ratebeer ,

> rel-stack

, and rel-avito . The remaining databases, re-trial 

and rel-f1 , are small and do not create memory pressure. 

10.8.1 Memory Pressure of Frontier Materialization. We first ex-amine how the size of a single materialized child frontier affects memory pressure. Because each candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) is evaluated independently over multiple seed batches, it can produce different frontier sizes across batches. For each candidate extension, we select the batch 

𝑏 ∗ (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = arg max  

> 𝑏

F (𝑏 ) 

> ℎ+1

(𝜋 1: ℎ ◦ 𝑒 ) ,

where F (𝑏 ) 

> ℎ+1

(𝜋 1: ℎ ◦ 𝑒 ) denotes the frontier table materialized for batch 𝑏 and for the candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ). This captures the worst observed memory pressure for that extension. We quantify the memory pressure created by frontier material-ization in terms of the increase in the resident set size (RSS) of the MetaSieve process (recall that DuckDB runs inside this process). For the frontier-materialization query of candidate extension (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 )

in its selected batch 𝑏 ∗ (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ), we measure the increase in resident set size as 

ΔRSS (𝜋 1: ℎ, 𝑒 ) = RSS peak − RSS before 

where RSS before is the process RSS immediately before executing the query and RSS peak is the largest RSS observed during its execution. RSS is sampled every 50 ms. We use one worker and one query execution thread so that frontier-materialization queries do not overlap, allowing the measured RSS increase to be attributed to a single candidate extension rather than concurrent SQL work. Figure 4 shows the increase in RSS for six of the largest RelBench tasks. The frontiers vary widely in size, and the increase in RSS grows approximately linearly with the number of materialized child rows, particularly for the largest frontiers on the right side of the plot. The figure also shows the best-fit line for the points, which has a slope of 1 .01, a very slightly superlinear relation. Such an almost-linear increase is good, and indicates that the memory for frontier materialization does not explode, even for the largest frontiers. For many small-to-medium frontiers, the measured increase remains near 4 KB, forming the horizontal line of points near the bottom of the plot. The memory page size is 4 KB, and the horizontal line indicates that DuckDB often reuses memory already allocated by earlier queries, leaving no observable RSS growth beyond 1 page, the operating system’s page-level measurement granularity. Once frontiers become sufficiently large, additional memory is required, and RSS grows in proportion to frontier size. 

> 16

Dataset/Task Name Workers Batches # Cand. Task Frontier Rows Peak Child Rows Concurrent Peak Child Rows Global Peak RSS (GB) Wall-Clock Time (s) rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 4 32 65 124.13B 5.28B 16.73B 1,040.22 1,436 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 4 32 51 51.51B 3.59B 13.25B 630.45 471 rel-avito/user-visits 4 16 23 25.67B 878.28M 3.34B 280.34 155 rel-avito/user-clicks 4 16 23 21.85B 758.26M 2.92B 233.91 135 rel-stack/post-votes 8 32 277 13.02B 153.23M 581.94M 147.65 168 rel-stack/user-badge 8 32 90 252.45M 7.38M 9.14M 12.77 31 rel-stack/user-engagement 8 32 90 217.78M 7.31M 7.42M 11.22 30 

Table 10: Frontier materialization and memory pressure under multi-worker execution. Task Frontier Rows is the total materialized volume, Peak Child Rows is the largest single frontier, and Concurrent Peak Child Rows is the largest combined frontier size of concurrently active queries. Global Peak RSS is the maximum sampled process RSS, and Wall-Clock Time is the end-to-end runtime. M and B denote million and billion rows. 100 10K 1M 100M 10B 

> Child rows materialized by candidate extension
> 1e-06 1e-04 0.01 1100
> RSS delta peak (GB)
> Dataset/task
> rel-ratebeer/user-churn rel-ratebeer/beer-churn rel-ratebeer/user-count rel-avito/user-visits rel-avito/user-clicks rel-avito/ad-ctr slope=1.01

Figure 4: Memory pressure of materializing a single frontier. Each point represents a candidate extension for a task. The x-axis represents the largest frontier table generated for this candidate extension. The y-axis is the peak RSS increase for the SQL query that generated this largest frontier table. Both axes use a log scale. 

10.8.2 Effect of Multi-worker Execution. The preceding experiment quantifies the memory pressure of frontier materialization using one worker and one query execution thread. However, MetaSieve normally processes multiple seed batches concurrently, as seen in Table 3, using multiple workers and multiple execution threads per worker. Consequently, several candidate-extension queries may materialize child frontiers concurrently, resulting in greater mem-ory pressure than an isolated query. In this section, we quantify memory pressure under multi-worker execution. Table 10 reports three complementary measures of frontier ma-terialization under multi-worker execution for seven of the largest tasks, sorted in descending order of these measures. Each row in the table reports the task name, number of workers used, number of batches per candidate extension, and the number of candidate extensions for this task. Next, the table reports the three measures of frontier materialization. Task Frontier Rows is the total number of child-frontier rows materialized by the entire task. It captures the cumulative frontier-processing workload and helps explain the overall execution time, since tasks that materialize more rows re-quire more total SQL processing. Peak Child Rows is the largest child frontier produced by any single candidate-extension query in any batch. This metric isolates the individual query that creates the largest materialization bottleneck. These two metrics do not capture the additional pressure created when several queries execute concurrently. We therefore measure 

Concurrent Peak Child Rows . For each candidate-extension query, we record when it starts and ends, and the number of rows in its ma-terialized child frontier. At every point during the run, we identify queries that are executing concurrently and sum their child-frontier sizes. The largest such sum over the complete run is the Concurrent Peak Child Rows. This metric captures the maximum amount of frontier materialization active simultaneously and therefore serves as a proxy for memory pressure under multi-worker execution. The next column in the table, Global Peak RSS , reports the corre-sponding memory consumption in GB. We sample the resident set size of the MetaSieve process during frontier generation every 0 .5seconds. Global Peak RSS is the largest observed RSS value. Since all workers execute within the same process, this measurement cap-tures their combined memory footprint. The final column shows end-to-end Wall-Clock Time .The results show that larger values of Concurrent Peak Child Rows correspond to larger Global Peak RSS values. That is, memory pressure in multi-worker execution is largely determined by the combined size of the child frontiers materialized simultaneously. For example, beer-churn has the largest concurrent peak at 16 .73 billion rows and reaches the highest memory usage at 1 ,040 .22 GB. In contrast, user-badge and user-engagement have concurrent peaks below 10 million rows and remain near 12 GB. 

10.8.3 Regulating Memory Pressure. Up to this point, we were not restricting the memory available to MetaSieve. We never experi-enced out-of-memory errors on our machine, which has 2 TB of RAM — not small, but very typical for modern servers. Nevertheless, it is important to have mechanisms that regulate the memory used by MetaSieve, to accommodate larger databases or smaller servers. In this section, we study these mechanisms. Regulating the memory consumed by a database workload is a standard exercise that is well-supported by modern database sys-tems. MetaSieve provides three practical control mechanisms for regulating memory pressure: First, we could reduce the number of concurrent workers, thereby directly limiting the concurrent pressure on memory. Second, we could increase the number of                                 

> 17 Dataset/Task Name Workers Batches Concurrent Peak Child Rows Global Peak RSS (GB) Wall-Clock Time (s) rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 432 16.73B 1,040.22 1,436 rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 332 13.87B 918.35 1,803 rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 232 10.34B 697.91 2,598 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 632 20.04B 974.21 390 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 532 16.61B 801.63 420 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 432 13.25B 630.45 471

Table 11: Effect of reducing worker count on memory. Reducing the number of workers reduces memory pressure but increases wall-clock time. B denotes billion rows.                                 

> Dataset/Task Name Workers Batches Concurrent Peak Child Rows Global Peak RSS (GB) Wall-Clock Time (s) rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 432 16.73B 1,040.22 1,436 rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 448 12.77B 792.60 1,420 rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 464 10.34B 637.47 1,427 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 632 20.04B 974.21 390 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 648 13.25B 613.54 397 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 664 10.17B 451.60 375

Table 12: Effect of increasing batch count on memory. More batches place fewer seeds in each batch, reducing memory pressure. B denotes billion rows.                                                              

> Dataset/Task Name Workers Mem Limit /Worker Threads /Worker Peak Spill (GB) Global Peak RSS (GB) Wall-Clock Time (s) rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 4default 810.64 1,040.22 1,436 rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 4128 GB 8375.25 520.33 1,335 rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 464 GB 4489.83 272.80 1,608 rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 432 GB 2504.13 142.15 2,253 rel-ratebeer/beer-churn 416 GB 2544.30 76.81 2,150 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 6default 80.00 974.21 390 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 696 GB 8301.00 577.74 312 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 648 GB 4463.67 304.18 390 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 624 GB 2534.75 160.40 565 rel-ratebeer/user-churn 612 GB 2574.84 84.90 547

Table 13: Effect of per-worker memory and thread limits on memory. A lower memory limit forces DuckDB to spill intermediate data to disk, substantially reducing Global Peak RSS while increasing disk usage and Wall-Clock Time. Peak Spill is the maximum sampled size of the temporary spill files. 

seed-node batches, which makes each batch smaller. Third, we could reduce the memory and worker threads given to DuckDB, relying on its ability to spill to disk as needed. These control mech-anisms expose different trade-offs between memory consumption, execution time, and disk spilling. In this experiment, we focus on the two largest tasks: beer-churn 

and user-churn on the rel-ratebeer dataset. Our default setting is to use 4 workers for beer-churn and 6 workers for user-churn ,since beer-churn is a larger task. Recall that each worker gets 8 query execution threads for DuckDB by default, and a memory limit of 𝑀 worker = 0.65 𝑀 available /𝑊 , where 𝑀 available is the available system memory and 𝑊 is the number of workers. For both tasks, our default is to use 32 seed-node batches. This default configura-tion is designed to maximize execution speed at the expense of high memory usage. Our goal is to study the effectiveness of the three memory control mechanisms described above in reducing memory consumption relative to the default setting, and to measure their impact on execution time. Table 11 shows how some of the metrics introduced in Table 10 vary as we reduce the number of workers. Reducing the number of workers limits the number of frontier materialization queries that can execute simultaneously, which reduces memory pressure. How-ever, fewer workers means fewer resources dedicated to frontier materialization, so wall-clock time increases, but the table shows no unmanageable jumps in wall-clock time as the number of workers decreases. Nevertheless, we see next that the other two mechanisms are more effective than reducing the number of workers. 

> 18

Table 12 shows the effect of increasing the number of seed-node batches. The total number of seed nodes remains unchanged, so each batch contains fewer seeds. Therefore, candidate-extension queries materialize smaller frontiers, reducing both Concurrent Peak Child Rows and Global Peak RSS. What is interesting is that increasing the number of batches leaves the overall runtime nearly unchanged. The reasons are as follows: First, increasing the num-ber of batches does not reduce the resources dedicated to frontier materialization. Second, more batches create more SQL queries, but each query has a smaller working set. In the tested range (32–64 batches), the benefit from avoiding large, memory-heavy joins out-weighs the fixed overhead of issuing more SQL statements. Third, one extremely large batch no longer dominates the wall-clock time, and from a large pool of independent units of work (more queries due to more batches), new queries can be selected for execution. The final mechanism for regulating MetaSieve memory is to reduce each worker’s memory limit and thread allocation while keeping the worker and batch counts fixed. Table 13 shows the effect of reducing the memory limit per worker. As the memory limit is reduced, the number of threads per worker must also be reduced to reduce the parallel work within each worker and en-sure that each thread has enough memory for effective execution. Lowering the memory limit forces DuckDB to spill intermediate data to disk rather than retaining it in memory, which is the stan-dard way DuckDB and other database systems handle memory pressure. The table reports Peak Spill, the largest total spill file size observed across all workers, measured at 0 .5-second intervals. The default setting results in minimal disk spilling but high memory con-sumption. Reducing the memory limit of each worker substantially reduces memory consumption as measured by Global Peak RSS, but increases disk usage and often execution time because spilled intermediate data must be written to and read from disk. Reducing the memory limit is the most direct way to run MetaSieve within a small memory budget, relying on the memory management capa-bilities of DuckDB (or any other DBMS). The table shows that the memory budget can be very low, even lower than 100 GB. Reducing the memory limit increases wall-clock time since MetaSieve has fewer resources for frontier materialization, but Table 13 shows that the increase in time is reasonable and never excessive. Overall, the three control mechanisms provide complementary options. Thus, users can select a configuration based on the avail-able memory, disk capacity and bandwidth, and desired execution time. Increasing the number of batches has the advantage of not re-ducing resources, so it can sometimes reduce memory consumption without increasing execution time, but it does not provide direct control on the amount of memory used, so it does not guarantee that memory will remain within a given budget. On the other hand, reducing the memory limit per worker and relying on the memory management capabilities of the DBMS directly controls memory usage and can ensure that memory remains within a small budget. 

## 11 CONCLUSION 

We presented MetaSieve, a metapath selection layer for RDL that leverages SQL to identify and prune uninformative metapaths be-fore GNN training. MetaSieve computes lightweight statistics and combines mutual information, sampling cost, and coverage into a scoring function that determines the metapaths to prune. Because the pipeline relies only on database statistics and task labels, it is GNN-agnostic and supports both classification and regression tasks within a single framework. MetaSieve supports temporally scoped prediction under a fixed schema and task definition. Adding or removing a table or foreign-key relationship changes the metap-ath search space, requiring MetaSieve to be rerun on the updated schema and data snapshot. Given the preprocessing costs reported in Table 3, periodic reruns are practical for the evaluated tasks, and we leave incrementally maintaining sampling rules under schema evolution for future work. Experiments on the RelBench benchmark show that MetaSieve improves both training time and accuracy, es-pecially on RelGT, demonstrating that informed metapath selection nicely complements strong GNN architectures. 

## REFERENCES                                                 

> [1] Muhammed Fatih Balin and Ümit Çatalyürek. 2023. Layer-Neighbor Sampling— Defusing Neighborhood Explosion in GNNs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2023). [2] Roberto Battiti. 1994. Using Mutual Information for Selecting Features in Super-vised Neural Net Learning. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks (1994). [3] Nitesh V Chawla, Kevin W Bowyer, Lawrence O Hall, and W Philip Kegelmeyer. 2002. SMOTE: synthetic minority over-sampling technique. Journal of artificial intelligence research (2002). [4] Tianlang Chen, Charilaos Kanatsoulis, and Jure Leskovec. 2025. RelGNN: Com-posite Message Passing for Relational Deep Learning. In Forty-second Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning .[5] Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Sri Jaladi, Yangyi Shen, Federico Lopez, Charilaos I. Kanatsoulis, Rishi Puri, Matthias Fey, and Jure Leskovec. 2026. Relational Graph Transformer. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .[6] Usama M Fayyad and Keki B Irani. 1993. Multi-interval discretization of continuous-valued attributes for classification learning. In IJCAI .[7] Francesco Ferrini, Antonio Longa, Andrea Passerini, and Manfred Jaeger. 2024. Meta-path Learning for Multi-Relational Graph Neural Networks. In Learning on Graphs Conference .[8] Francesco Ferrini, Antonio Longa, Andrea Passerini, and Manfred Jaeger. 2025. A Self-Explainable Heterogeneous GNN for Relational Deep Learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2025). [9] Matthias Fey, Weihua Hu, Kexin Huang, Jan Eric Lenssen, Rishabh Ranjan, Joshua Robinson, Rex Ying, Jiaxuan You, and Jure Leskovec. 2024. Position: Relational Deep Learning - Graph Representation Learning on Relational Databases. In
> Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning .[10] Matthias Fey, Vid Kocijan, Federico Lopez, J Lenssen, and Jure Leskovec. 2025. Kumorfm: A foundation model for in-context learning on relational data. [11] Matthias Fey and Jan Eric Lenssen. 2019. Fast Graph Representation Learning with PyTorch Geometric. In ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds .[12] Matthias Fey, Jinu Sunil, Akihiro Nitta, Rishi Puri, Manan Shah, Blaž Stojanovič, Ramona Bendias, Alexandria Barghi, Vid Kocijan, Zecheng Zhang, Xinwei He, Jan Eric Lenssen, and Jure Leskovec. 2025. PyG 2.0: Scalable Learning on Real World Graphs. In Temporal Graph Learning Workshop @ KDD .[13] Russell Greiner, Adam J Grove, and Dan Roth. 2002. Learning cost-sensitive active classifiers. Artificial Intelligence (2002). [14] Justin Gu, Rishabh Ranjan, Charilaos I. Kanatsoulis, Haiming Tang, Martin Jurkovič, Valter Hudovernik, Mark Znidar, Pranshu Chaturvedi, Parth Shroff, Fengyu Li, and Jure Leskovec. 2026. RelBench v2: A Large-Scale Benchmark and Relational Data Repository. In ICLR 2026 Workshop on Data Problems for Foundation Models (DATA-FM) .https://openreview.net/forum?id=kplDfjCbC7 [15] Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Inductive Representation Learning on Large Graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
> (2017). [16] Haibo He and Edwardo A Garcia. 2009. Learning from imbalanced data. IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineering (2009). [17] Ziniu Hu, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, and Yizhou Sun. 2020. Heterogeneous graph transformer. In Proceedings of the web conference 2020 .[18] Fahim Shahriar Khan and Ashraf Aboulnaga. 2025. A Vision for SQL-Based Relational Deep Learning. In Workshop on Tabular Data Analysis at VLDB (TaDA) .[19] Gary King and Langche Zeng. 2001. Logistic regression in rare events data.
> Political analysis (2001). [20] Alexander Kraskov, Harald Stögbauer, and Peter Grassberger. 2004. Estimating mutual information. Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics (2004).
> 19

[21] Ni Lao and William W Cohen. 2010. Relational retrieval using a combination of path-constrained random walks. Machine learning (2010). [22] Chao Li, Zijie Guo, Qiuting He, and Kun He. 2024. Long-range Meta-path Search on Large-scale Heterogeneous Graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2024). [23] Yi Li, Yilun Jin, Guojie Song, Zihao Zhu, Chuan Shi, and Yiming Wang. 2021. Graphmse: Efficient Meta-path Selection in Semantically Aligned Feature Space for Graph Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on Artificial Intelligence .[24] Geoffrey J McLachlan and David Peel. 2000. Finite mixture models . John Wiley & Sons. [25] Nicolai Meinshausen and Peter Bühlmann. 2010. Stability selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology (2010). [26] Feng Nan, Joseph Wang, and Venkatesh Saligrama. 2015. Feature-budgeted random forest. In International Conference on Machine Learning .[27] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research (2011). [28] Hanchuan Peng, Fuhui Long, and Chris Ding. 2005. Feature Selection Based on Mutual Information: Criteria of Max-Dependency, Max-Relevance, and Min-Redundancy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 

(2005). [29] Mark Raasveldt and Hannes Mühleisen. 2019. Duckdb: an embeddable analytical database. In Proceedings of the 2019 international conference on management of data .[30] Rishabh Ranjan, Valter Hudovernik, Mark Znidar, Charilaos I. Kanatsoulis, Roshan Reddy Upendra, Mahmoud Mohammadi, Joe Meyer, Tom Palczewski, Carlos Guestrin, and Jure Leskovec. 2026. Relational Transformer: Toward Zero-Shot Foundation Models for Relational Data. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .[31] Joshua Robinson, Rishabh Ranjan, Weihua Hu, Kexin Huang, Jiaqi Han, Alejandro Dobles, Matthias Fey, Jan Eric Lenssen, Yiwen Yuan, Zecheng Zhang, et al. 2024. RelBench: A benchmark for deep learning on relational databases. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2024). [32] Brian C Ross. 2014. Mutual information between discrete and continuous data sets. PloS one (2014). [33] Chuan Shi, Xiangnan Kong, Yue Huang, Philip S Yu, and Bin Wu. 2014. Hetesim: A general framework for relevance measure in heterogeneous networks. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (2014). [34] Yizhou Sun, Jiawei Han, Xifeng Yan, Philip S Yu, and Tianyi Wu. 2011. Pathsim: Meta path-based top-k similarity search in heterogeneous information networks. 

Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment (2011). [35] Paweł Teisseyre and Tomasz Klonecki. 2021. Controlling costs in feature selection: information theoretic approach. In International Conference on Computational Science .[36] Peter D Turney. 1994. Cost-sensitive classification: Empirical evaluation of a hybrid genetic decision tree induction algorithm. Journal of artificial intelligence research (1994). [37] Nguyen Xuan Vinh, Julien Epps, and James Bailey. 2010. Information Theoretic Measures for Clusterings Comparison: Variants, Properties, Normalization and Correction for Chance. Journal of Machine Learning Research (2010). [38] Minjie Wang, Quan Gan, David Wipf, Zhenkun Cai, Ning Li, Jianheng Tang, Yanlin Zhang, Zizhao Zhang, Zunyao Mao, Yakun Song, et al. 2024. 4DBInfer: A 4d Benchmarking Toolbox for Graph-Centric Predictive Modeling on RDBs. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2024). [39] Xiao Wang, Houye Ji, Chuan Shi, Bai Wang, Yanfang Ye, Peng Cui, and Philip S Yu. 2019. Heterogeneous Graph Attention Network. In The world wide web conference .[40] Yanbo Wang, Xiyuan Wang, Quan Gan, Minjie Wang, Qibin Yang, David Wipf, and Muhan Zhang. 2025. Griffin: Towards a Graph-Centric Relational Database Foundation Model. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning .[41] Seongjun Yun, Minbyul Jeong, Raehyun Kim, Jaewoo Kang, and Hyunwoo J Kim. 2019. Graph Transformer Networks. Advances in neural information processing systems (2019). [42] Hanqing Zeng, Hongkuan Zhou, Ajitesh Srivastava, Rajgopal Kannan, and Viktor Prasanna. 2020. GraphSAINT: Graph Sampling Based Inductive Learning Method. In International Conference on Learning Representations .[43] Zhiqiang Zhong, Cheng-Te Li, and Jun Pang. 2022. Personalised meta-path gen-eration for heterogeneous graph neural networks. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (2022).