Title: TailBooster: A Dual-Layer Generative Framework for Extreme Value Augmentation with Operational Validity Enforcement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.11951v1

Published Time: Thu, 13 Aug 2026 00:59:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# TailBooster: A Dual-Layer Generative Framework for Extreme Value Augmentation with Operational Validity Enforcement 

Karim Aly ∗, Alexei Sharpanskykh, Jacco Hoekstra 

> Control and Operations, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, Delft University of Technology (TU Delft), Kluyverweg 1, Delft, 2629 HS, South Holland, Netherlands

Abstract 

Extreme events in air transportation, such as severe arrival delays and abnormal air times, cause cascading network disruptions with substantial operational, economic, and safety costs. Such events are rare in historical records, leaving insu ffi cient training signal for machine learning models to learn their patterns. Synthetic data augmentation o ff ers a principled solution, but conventional generative models under-represent distributional tails and give no guarantee against operationally infeasible instances, such as a short air time paired with a long flight distance. No existing approach addresses both limitations for mixed-type tabular records. We therefore propose TailBooster , a dual-layer generative framework combining generative modelling with two anomaly detection layers. A statistical layer extracts extremes via the interquartile range, supplying tail-concentrated training signal to dedicated gen-erative models, here a Tabular Variational Autoencoder. A deep learning layer then applies autoencoder-based cleaning, discarding synthetic records that violate the operational envelope learned from historical data. The framework was evaluated on U.S. flight records across five dimensions: diversity, statistical similarity, fidelity, operational validity, and utility, the latter two constituting the primary improvement targets. Data-driven cleaning markedly improved operational validity, while targeted augmentation en-hanced utility for extreme-event prediction. Across six regression algorithms, training on the framework’s records reduced Mean Absolute Error by 47–49% on extreme air time and 29–57% on extreme arrival delay prediction relative to conventional synthetic data, with comparable gains when real records were enriched with synthetic extremes. Being fully data-driven and model-agnostic, 

TailBooster extends naturally to domains where extreme-event prediction is critical and domain-specific rules are unavailable. 

Keywords: Generative AI, Anomaly Detection, Synthetic Data Augmentation, Extreme Value Generation, Extreme Event Prediction, Air Tra ffi c Management, Arrival Delay 

1. Introduction 

Air transportation is periodically disrupted by extreme oper-ational events, most notably severe arrival delays and abnormal air times, whose consequences extend well beyond the imme-diate incident, a ff ecting airlines, airports, passengers, and air tra ffi c management. A single extreme delay can trigger cascad-ing disruptions across a network, incurring substantial costs in crew rescheduling, aircraft repositioning, and passenger com-pensation (Cook and Tanner, 2015), while abnormal air times, whether caused by technical irregularities or adverse meteoro-logical conditions, drive excess fuel consumption and compro-mise both operational e ffi ciency and safety. Reliable predic-tion of such events is therefore essential for proactive decision-making and operational resilience. In historical flight records, extreme events remain inherently rare relative to nominal operations, and this rarity creates a fun-damental learning problem. The distributional tails of numer-ical features, such as air time and arrival delay, are sparsely     

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email addresses: k.y.s.b.aly@tudelft.nl (Karim Aly),
> o.a.sharpanskykh@tudelft.nl (Alexei Sharpanskykh),
> j.m.hoekstra@tudelft.nl (Jacco Hoekstra)

populated in historical data, providing insu ffi cient training sig-nal for machine learning models to learn the patterns that char-acterise these tails. As air time and arrival delay are contin-uous operational metrics rather than discrete categories, pre-dicting their magnitude is naturally formulated as a regression task. The result is regression models that generalise well across nominal conditions but fail precisely where accurate prediction matters most: at the extremes. This challenge is compounded by limited public accessibil-ity of historical flight data beyond the organisations owning it. Aviation stakeholders, such as airlines, airports, and air navi-gation service providers, hold their own historical records, but data-sharing among them remains constrained by commercial, regulatory, and privacy considerations (Aly and Sharpanskykh, 2025). Researchers and analysts operating outside these organ-isations therefore face a dual obstacle: not only are extreme events rare within any single dataset, but access to detailed and representative operational records is itself restricted. For in-stance, in Europe, the EUROCONTROL Demand Data Reposi-tory (DDR), which contains historical tra ffi c demand and Air Tra ffi c Flow Management (ATFM) delay data, is accessible only to licensed air navigation service providers and airline op-erators (Ruocco et al., 2025). Similarly, European flight sched-arXiv:2608.11951v1 [cs.LG] 12 Aug 2026 ules are owned by individual airlines, and researchers seeking access can only purchase them from private agencies (Ruocco et al., 2025). For this reason, the present study uses the domes-tic flight records from the U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statis-tics (BTS) (Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 2023; U.S. De-partment of Transportation), which represent the only pub-licly accessible source of per-flight operational records com-bining scheduled and actual times, flight status classifications (delayed, cancelled, and diverted) alongside their documented causes, and detailed diversion metadata, all at the route level. Synthetic data generation o ff ers a principled pathway to ad-dress both obstacles. By augmenting historical records with synthetic extremes, practitioners with access to real data can enrich the tail regions of their datasets and improve the pre-dictability of extreme events; for those without such access, high-quality synthetic data can serve as a substitute, enabling model development and benchmarking without requiring direct access to historical records. However, beyond reproducing the overall distribution of individual features, standard generative models o ff er no guarantee of preserving the operational corre-lations between them, and may therefore generate records that are operationally infeasible, such as a short air time paired with a long flight distance, which makes these synthetic records un-suitable to train downstream task models or decision-making systems (Aly and Sharpanskykh, 2025). Additionally, they systematically under-represent distributional tails, irrespective of how well they approximate the overall distribution (Huster et al., 2021; Bhatia et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2025). Approaches that embed Extreme Value Theory (EVT) into generative archi-tectures to address the tail under-representation deficit (Bhatia et al., 2021; Lafon et al., 2023) are designed for continuous, single-type feature spaces, such as geophysical fields or finan-cial return series, and have not been extended to the mixed-type tabular records characteristic of aviation data. Conditional generation (Xu et al., 2019) is applicable to mixed-type tabular data but does not resolve this deficit, since conditioning oper-ates at sampling time rather than at training time: selecting a rare class as the conditioning label changes which records are retrieved from the model, but it does not alter the sparse tail-region signal the model received during training, which is the actual cause of the under-representation (Khorram et al., 2024). As a result, the conditionally sampled extremes cannot be guar-anteed to be realistic or operationally valid. Outlier-focused tabular architectures address the mixed-type setting and gener-ate outliers, but without targeting specific distributional tails of user-defined continuous features or enforcing operational valid-ity (Azimi et al., 2024). Domain-constrained generative mod-els do enforce operational plausibility, but through hand-crafted symbolic rules that require domain-specific re-engineering for each new application context and presuppose that the govern-ing physical relationships are known, which is not always the case, such as for the correlation between air time and flight dis-tance for specific airport pairs (Karimanzira, 2024; Yi et al., 2024). No existing approach therefore simultaneously targets tail under-representation in mixed-type tabular records and en-forces operational validity in a fully data-driven fashion. The objective of this study is therefore twofold: to develop a generative framework that combines generative modelling with anomaly detection to produce synthetic flight records with im-proved extreme representativeness and operational validity, and to evaluate whether augmenting training data with such records translates into measurable gains in the predictability of extreme events, i.e., regression accuracy on extreme target values. To this end, this study proposes TailBooster , a dual-layer generative framework for extreme-value augmentation with op-erational validity enforcement. The dual-layer design brackets a Tabular Variational Autoencoder (TVAE) generative stage— chosen for its comparative training stability and lower computa-tional cost relative to alternative generative architectures—with two anomaly detection layers: a statistical layer that precedes generation and a deep learning layer that follows it. The frame-work takes as input the full historical dataset together with two user-defined feature lists: (i) the target features whose distri-butional tails are to be augmented, used by the statistical layer to isolate extreme subsets, and (ii) the operationally correlated features, i.e., features whose joint values are governed by op-erational constraints, used by the deep learning layer to charac-terise operational feasibility. The process starts with the statisti-cal layer, which performs IQR-based extreme-subset extraction prior to generation, isolating one extreme subset per target fea-ture to supply a tail-concentrated training signal to dedicated generative models. A TVAE is then trained on the full dataset and another TVAE on each extreme subset; synthetic records are then sampled from all models, and the resulting records are filtered to retain only those whose origin–destination air-port pairs appear in the historical data. After generation, the deep learning layer applies pre-trained autoencoders to these candidate synthetic records, discarding samples that fall out-side the empirical operational envelope learned from the his-torical data. This data-driven cleaning step enforces opera-tional validity without requiring hand-crafted domain rules to be available. The pipeline yields three synthetic or augmented datasets—Naïve Synthetic, Augmented Synthetic, and Aug-mented Real—which, together with the original Real dataset, are assessed across five complementary dimensions: diversity, statistical similarity, fidelity, operational validity, and regres-sion utility on extreme subsets. This assessment adopts and extends the multi-dimensional evaluation framework from our earlier work (Aly et al., 2026). Although demonstrated here in an aviation context, the framework is transferable to any do-main where the prediction of extreme values of target numer-ical features is operationally critical, with its fully data-driven operational cleaning making it particularly suitable for settings where physical governing equations or domain-specific sym-bolic rules for enforcing operational validity are unavailable. Finally, the generative component is model-agnostic: the TVAE can be replaced by any tabular generative model without alter-ing any other part of the pipeline. The contributions of this research are fourfold: (i) a dual-layer generative framework for mixed-type tabular data that combines the representational capacity of deep generative mod-els with statistical and deep learning anomaly detection, jointly addressing tail under-representation and enforcing operational validity in a fully data-driven manner; (ii) a demonstration that 2the data-driven operational cleaning mechanism markedly im-proves the operational validity of synthetic flight records rel-ative to conventional generation; (iii) evidence that targeted extreme value augmentation consistently improves the pre-dictability of extreme events across six models spanning three distinct regression families; and (iv) a comparative evaluation demonstrating measurable quality gains both for practitioners with access to historical flight records, through augmentation of real data with operationally valid synthetic extremes, and for those without such access, through augmented and opera-tionally cleaned synthetic data that outperforms conventionally generated synthetic data. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Sec-tion 2 reviews the literature. Section 3 presents the TailBooster 

architecture, evaluation framework, and hyperparameter tuning procedure. Section 4 reports experimental results across all five evaluation dimensions. Section 5 interprets key design choices and their practical and computational implications. Section 6 concludes with key findings and directions for future work. 

2. Related work 

The literature relevant to this work spans five intercon-nected areas. We first situate the proposed framework within the broader landscape of generative models for tabular data synthesis, establishing the architectural baseline and its well-documented tail blindspot (Section 2.1). We then introduce Ex-treme Value Theory (EVT) as the statistical foundation for prin-cipled tail characterisation (Section 2.2), before reviewing the family of EVT-augmented generative models that embed this theory into deep learning architectures (Section 2.3). The re-view subsequently narrows to outlier-focused architectures for tabular data, with particular attention to zGAN as the closest ex-isting implementation to TailBooster (Section 2.4), and closes with domain-constrained generative models that enforce oper-ational plausibility through explicit physical constraints or im-plicit conditioning (Section 2.5). 

2.1. Generative Models for Synthetic Tabular Data 

Over the past decade, generative modelling has emerged as a leading paradigm for synthesising tabular data in domains where data scarcity, privacy constraints, or class imbalance limit the direct use of historical records. The literature is domi-nated by three architectural families: generative adversarial net-works, variational autoencoders, and di ff usion models. Gener-ative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), in which a generator and discriminator are trained in a mini-max adversarial loop, were among the first to demonstrate high-fidelity synthesis of complex distributions, though their adver-sarial training dynamics remain prone to instability and mode collapse (Xiao et al., 2021). Their tabular adaptations, most notably the Conditional Tabular GAN (Xu et al., 2019) and the Copula GAN (Patki et al., 2016), introduced mode-specific con-ditional sampling and copula-based dependency modelling to accommodate the mixed data types and complex dependency structures characteristic of tabular records. Variational autoen-coders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling, 2013) and their tabular adaptation, the Tabular Variational Autoencoder (TVAE) (Xu et al., 2019), introduced a complementary probabilistic frame-work in which an encoder maps observations into a regularised latent distribution and a decoder reconstructs them by max-imising the evidence lower bound (ELBO) on the data like-lihood, enabling training that is less susceptible to the mode collapse a ff ecting GANs and computationally lighter than dif-fusion models (Xiao et al., 2021). More recently, di ff usion models (Ho et al., 2020), which learn to reverse a progres-sive noise-corruption process through iterative denoising, have shown strong training stability and sample diversity in image and continuous-data domains, albeit at a substantially higher computational cost due to their iterative sampling process (Xiao et al., 2021); their application to tabular data is comparatively recent, though emerging work suggests they may o ff er advan-tages in capturing complex multivariate dependencies (Kotel-nikov et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2025). These architectures have been applied to aviation data syn-thesis in our prior work. Aly and Sharpanskykh (2025) demon-strated their ability to generate synthetic flight records of suf-ficient statistical fidelity to support arrival delay prediction, using a dataset consisting exclusively of nominal operations without extreme events, while Aly et al. (2026) extended this work to augment rare flight diversion records through a multi-objective hyperparameter optimisation scheme, showing that targeted synthetic augmentation could measurably improve the predictive performance of downstream classifiers. Across both studies, the generated data faithfully captured the central ten-dencies and common operational patterns observed in the his-torical distributions. However, all three architectural families share a structural limitation that directly motivates the present work. Their train-ing objectives, whether adversarial, ELBO maximisation, or de-noising score matching, inherently prioritise the high-density regions of the data distribution, where most of the training sig-nal resides. Extreme observations residing in the distributional tails are consequently under-represented in the generated data, irrespective of how well the overall distribution is approximated (Huster et al., 2021; Bhatia et al., 2021; Lafon et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2025). Conditional generation, where the model is con-ditioned on a class label or feature value during sampling, ap-pears to o ff er a solution. In practice, however, conditioning cannot compensate for a lack of representative training exam-ples. When the conditioned class is rare, the model receives insu ffi cient signal to learn that region of the distribution, of-ten producing low-fidelity or degenerate samples rather than resolving the tail coverage deficit (Khorram et al., 2024). This tail blindspot is therefore a direct consequence of what these models are trained to optimise: accuracy over the bulk of the distribution, with no incentive to represent its tails. Address-ing this limitation requires a statistical framework that explic-itly characterises tail behaviour and provides a principled basis for modelling extremes. Extreme Value Theory provides this foundation. 32.2. Extreme Value Theory for Tail Modelling 

Extreme Value Theory (EVT) provides the statistical foun-dation for characterising the behaviour of distribution tails and has long served as the principled framework for modelling rare, high-impact events in engineering, finance, and environmental science (de Haan and Ferreira, 2006; Coles, 2001; Embrechts et al., 1997). Its central theoretical result states that, under mild regularity conditions, the distribution of extreme observations converges to one of a small family of limiting distributions, a result that holds across a broad class of underlying data dis-tributions, making EVT well suited to applications where the parent distribution is unknown. Two complementary methods operationalise this result: the Block Maxima method, which models the maximum value within non-overlapping blocks of observations (Ferreira and de Haan, 2015), and the Peaks-Over-Threshold (POT) method, which models all observations exceeding a user-defined thresh-old via the Generalised Pareto Distribution (GPD) (Leadbetter, 1991; Pickands, 1975; Balkema and de Haan, 1974). For con-tinuous data in which extreme events occur sporadically, POT is generally preferred, as it makes more e ffi cient use of the avail-able observations than block-based aggregation (Coles, 2001). Fitting a GPD to the empirical tail yields a model capable of extrapolating beyond the largest observed value, a capability that standard generative models and simple resampling strate-gies generally lack. This treatment of the tail as a distinct sta-tistical regime motivated our IQR-based extreme subset extrac-tion, a non-parametric, operationally driven analogue to POT thresholding: rather than fitting a parametric GPD, we isolate the empirical tail directly and use it as a targeted training signal for the generative component of TailBooster .EVT’s extrapolative power, however, is confined to a single feature at a time: EVT is a tail estimator, not a generator, and on its own cannot produce synthetic multivariate records that pre-serve inter-feature dependencies, heterogeneous data types, and operational constraints. Realising its benefits for data synthesis has therefore motivated embedding EVT principles into gener-ative models, giving rise to a growing body of EVT-augmented methods, reviewed next. 

2.3. EVT-Augmented Generative Models for Extreme Synthesis 

Building upon this statistical foundation, EVT principles have been integrated directly into generative models to improve the synthesis of extreme observations: through modifications to the training objective, at the sampling or conditioning stage, or within the latent representation. The first strategy embeds EVT constraints directly into the training objective, as in Pareto GAN (Huster et al., 2021), which incorporates a tail-index-aware loss to stabilise training on heavy-tailed marginals, and EV-GAN (Allouche et al., 2022), which reparametrises the generator to better approximate un-bounded quantiles. The second strategy conditions the genera-tor on EVT-fitted tail distributions: ExGAN (Bhatia et al., 2021) conditions generation on a GPD-derived extremeness measure to sample at a user-specified extremeness probability, and its spatial extension evtGAN (Boulaguiem et al., 2022) captures tail dependence across geographically distributed climate vari-ables. The third strategy modifies the latent representation to encode heavy-tailed structure: HTGAN (Girard et al., 2025) re-places the standard Gaussian latent prior with a heavy-tailed distribution, while ExtVAE (Lafon et al., 2023) applies multi-variate regular variation theory to model event magnitude and dependence structure separately via a radius–angle decomposi-tion. Taken together, these contributions represent a substantial advance over standard generative baselines. Yet a common limitation remains: existing EVT-augmented generative meth-ods have primarily been developed for continuous univariate or multivariate data, such as geophysical fields, climate records, and financial returns, and generally assume continuous, homo-geneous feature spaces amenable to probabilistic reparametri-sation. This assumption breaks down for mixed-type tabular records, which often combine categorical, discrete numerical, continuous numerical, and datetime features, as in aviation, where such heterogeneous variables must be modelled jointly while preserving domain-specific validity. 

2.4. Outlier-Focused Generative Architectures for Tabular Ex-treme Augmentation 

A parallel strand of the literature has addressed outlier and rare-event synthesis directly in the tabular domain, motivated primarily by data imbalance in financial applications. Jiang et al. (2024) represents this strand, proposing GAN-based aug-mentation schemes that generate synthetic minority-class in-stances, corresponding to rare systemic risk events or extreme market conditions, to rebalance training datasets and improve downstream classification performance. This work demon-strated that adversarial augmentation of rare tabular records can improve minority-class detection metrics, yet it does not en-force structural constraints ensuring that the generated records are operationally coherent beyond their distributional similarity to the training data. The most explicitly outlier-focused treatment is zGAN (Az-imi et al., 2024), developed and validated on financial services data, which is also the closest existing implementation to the framework proposed in this study. Azimi et al. (2024) inte-grated a Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE) and a GAN within a unified pipeline. The CVAE learns structured latent representations of real tabular data and generates syn-thetic covariance matrices that encode inter-feature dependen-cies. These matrices are then passed to a dedicated Outlier Conditional Covariance Generator ( covGEN ) to sample macro-outliers. Outlier magnitudes are drawn from heavy-tailed dis-tributions, including Laplace, Weibull, Gumbel, and Lévy dis-tributions, parameterised by the estimated covariance. A hash-based similarity filter subsequently removes synthetic records that closely resemble real training instances, thereby preserv-ing privacy. The final output combines baseline synthetic data with outlier-augmented records, while a Target Model module based on gradient-boosted classification imputes predicted tar-get labels into the synthetic records. Despite these contributions, zGAN exhibits three limitations that are consequential for the present study. First, its evalua-4tion framework is oriented towards binary classification utility, assessed using the Area Under the Curve metric, rather than to-wards regression accuracy on extreme target values, which is the primary objective here. Second, outlier magnitude is gov-erned by covariance geometry, with no explicit mechanism for verifying that the generated records satisfy operational validity constraints beyond the statistical structure of the training data. Third, the architecture is GAN-dependent and designed for fi-nancial tabular data, leaving open the question of how domain-specific operational validity can be enforced in aviation, where feasibility constraints are often relational rather than purely sta-tistical. This limitation points directly to a broader design chal-lenge that domain-constrained generative models have sought to address. 

2.5. Domain-Constrained Generative Modelling and Opera-tional Validity 

The outlier-focused architectures reviewed in the preceding section demonstrate that extreme tabular synthesis is feasible, yet they share a common assumption: that statistical similarity to the training distribution is su ffi cient to ensure the usefulness of the generated records. In engineering and environmental do-mains, this assumption often fails. A synthetic flood record with statistically plausible discharge values is not useful if it violates mass conservation; a synthetic power-grid scenario is not use-ful if generation and demand do not balance. Extreme events in such settings must therefore respect the physical, operational, or systemic constraints that govern the real system, not merely resemble its historical statistics. This requirement has moti-vated a distinct strand of work in which domain knowledge is embedded directly into the generative process. In the hydrological domain, MC-TSGAN (Karimanzira, 2024) embeds mass conservation, energy balance, and hy-draulic continuity as regularisation terms in a time-series GAN’s loss function, keeping synthetic extreme flood-event se-quences physically consistent and improving multi-step runo ff 

forecasting. In the energy domain, the same principle of con-straint embedding is pursued through conditional architectures: an improved InfoGAN variant (Yi et al., 2024) preserves the joint correlation between wind, solar, and load variables un-der extreme demand conditions via mutual-information-based latent structure, while C-DCGAN (Li et al., 2023) combines Wasserstein loss with a ranked selection mechanism to retain only scenarios satisfying extreme risk criteria across genera-tion, storage, and demand. A complementary strategy, pur-sued in climate and geophysical applications, embeds domain consistency implicitly through conditioning: Di ff ESM (Bas-setti et al., 2024) conditions a di ff usion model on Earth Sys-tem Model means to emulate extreme temperature and pre-cipitation sequences with realistic spatio-temporal coherence, while Peard and Hall (2023) combines GAN-based generation with EVT-based tail extrapolation to produce spatially coher-ent compound hazard scenarios. Across these examples, op-erational constraints are formulated as symbolic regularisers, conditional inputs, or post-hoc filters incorporated into the gen-erative pipeline at training or sampling time. Collectively, these approaches show that integrating domain knowledge is a powerful means of generating operationally credible extreme records in constrained systems, particularly where the governing physical laws are well established. Their applicability, however, is bounded by this same requirement: governing laws such as mass-conservation terms, grid-stability conditions, and physical parameterisations are domain-specific, limiting their transferability to other operational settings. Addi-tionally, they presuppose that such laws are known and formal-isable in the first place, which is not always the case. This mo-tivates a data-driven alternative capable of learning operational plausibility empirically from historical records rather than en-coding it symbolically, particularly for settings where govern-ing laws are unknown. In TailBooster , this role is fulfilled by the autoencoder-based anomaly cleaning layer. The foregoing review identifies four compounding gaps in the existing literature. First, standard generative architectures concentrate probability mass near the centre of the distribution, thereby systematically under-representing distributional tails (Huster et al., 2021; Bhatia et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2025). Sec-ond, although EVT provides the statistical foundation needed to characterise these tails, EVT-augmented generative models that build on it generally assume continuous, homogeneous feature spaces incompatible with mixed-type tabular aviation records (Bhatia et al., 2021; Girard et al., 2025; Lafon et al., 2023). Third, outlier-focused tabular architectures such as 

zGAN (Azimi et al., 2024) do not explicitly enforce opera-tional validity and primarily target classification rather than re-gression utility. Finally, domain-constrained approaches em-bed operational knowledge through hand-crafted physical pri-ors that are di ffi cult to transfer across domains (Karimanzira, 2024; Yi et al., 2024). The proposed TailBooster responds to these gaps through a dual-layer, generative-model-agnostic augmentation framework that brackets tail-focused generation between an IQR-based statistical anomaly detection layer and an autoencoder-based anomaly cleaning layer, while incorpo-rating a relational validity filter adapted to flight records. Eval-uation adopts and extends the multi-dimensional framework developed in Aly et al. (2026) by combining standard dis-tributional metrics with regression utility on extreme subsets, thereby assessing both tail coverage and operational validity. The architecture, training procedure, and evaluation protocol are described in full in the following section. 

3. Methodology 

This section describes the data sources, preprocessing steps, and feature engineering decisions underpinning the study. It then presents the architecture of the proposed TailBooster 

model. Finally, it details the evaluation criteria used to assess the quality of the generated data and the multi-objective hyper-parameter tuning procedure applied to the generative stage. 

3.1. Data and Preprocessing 

Flight records for this study were drawn from the TranStats Database for Airline On-Time Performance (Bureau of Trans-portation Statistics, 2023; U.S. Department of Transportation), 5a publicly accessible repository maintained by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS). The database compiles U.S. domestic flight information encompassing operational delay types, cancellations, and diversions, making it well suited to a broad range of air transport research applications. Building upon our previous work (Aly and Sharpanskykh, 2025), which established the preprocessing and feature engi-neering pipeline, this study applies the same procedure to all arrivals and departures in New York State during January 2023, without restricting the scope to flights between two specific airports. Cancelled and diverted flights were excluded, as the present study targets the distributional tails of continuous on-time performance metrics, such as “Air Time (min)” and “Ar-rival ∆T (min)”, rather than the diversion minority class ad-dressed in Aly et al. (2026). The resulting dataset comprised 30 features and approximately 61,000 flight records, spanning 113 airports across 508 routes. To preserve temporal consistency between synthetic records, the features supplied to the generative models were required to be mutually independent, with no overlapping information be-tween them. Figure 1 illustrates the full set of temporal features in the historical records, distinguishing those used as direct in-puts to the generative model from those derived after genera-tion. Notably, “Air Time (min)” and “Arrival ∆T (min)” were deliberately retained as generative model inputs rather than de-rived post-generation: both are continuous operational metrics whose distributional tails are the primary focus of this study, and both are designated throughout as target features , the fea-tures whose extreme values TailBooster is designed to augment in order to improve their predictability in downstream regres-sion tasks. Preventing information overlap in the temporal fea-tures fed to the generative model ensures that derived features computed post-generation remain internally consistent by con-struction: for instance, the departure delay is guaranteed to equal the di ff erence between the scheduled and actual depar-ture times, air time to equal the interval between wheels-o ff and wheels-on, and arrival delay to equal the di ff erence between the scheduled and actual arrival times. Additionally, priority was given to numerical duration features, expressed in minutes, over raw datetime features: datetime variables are di ffi cult for machine learning models to handle directly and require either Unix epoch encoding, which discards cyclic and seasonal struc-ture, or decomposition into multiple sub-fields, each of which increases the dimensionality of the generative model’s input space and risks degrading synthesis quality. 2 /xx        

> Scheduled departure UTC
> Actual departure UTC
> Wheels
> off UTC
> Wheels
> on UTC
> Actual
> arrival UTC
> Scheduled arrival UTC
> Dep. ΔT (min) Taxi out (min) Air time (min) Taxi in (min) Arr. ΔT (min)
> Actual Elapsed Time (min)
> Scheduled Elapsed Time (min)

Figure 1. Temporal features used as direct inputs to the generative model (blue) and computed after generation (red). 

To minimise feature redundancy, 10 features were selected as direct inputs to the generative models: 6 temporal variables illustrated in Figure 1 and 4 categorical features; the remaining attributes, designated as relational features , were derived post-generation to preserve inter-feature dependencies and enhance the realism of the synthetic records. Table 1 lists all features, indicating whether each was used for generation, and specify-ing the subsets employed for predicting “Air Time (min)” and “Arrival ∆T (min)”, as described in Section 3.3.5.                                                                                                

> Feature Generation input Prediction of “Air Time (min)” Prediction of “Arrival ∆T (min)”
> Unique Carrier Code ✓✓✓
> Tail Number ✓✓✓
> Origin Airport ID ✓pp
> ICAO Origin Airport y✓✓
> Origin City ypp
> Origin State Code ypp
> Origin State Name ypp
> Destination Airport ID ✓pp
> ICAO Destination Airport y✓✓
> Destination City ypp
> Destination State Code ypp
> Destination State Name ypp
> Quarter y✓✓
> Day of Week y✓✓
> Scheduled Departure Time UTC ✓✓✓
> Actual Departure Time UTC y✓✓
> Departure ∆T (min) ✓✓✓
> Departure Delay Label ypp
> Taxi Out Time (min) ✓✓✓
> Wheels O ff Time UTC y✓✓
> Wheels On Time UTC ypp
> Taxi In Time (min) ✓pp
> Scheduled Arrival Time UTC y✓✓
> Actual Arrival Time UTC ypp
> Arrival ∆T (min) ✓pTarget
> Arrival Delay Label ypp
> Scheduled Elapsed Time (min) y✓✓
> Actual Elapsed Time (min) ypp
> Air Time (min) ✓Target p
> Distance (miles) y✓✓

Table 1. Features used in this analysis , categorised as : included (✓), ex -

cluded (p), or calculated post -generation (y). 

3.2. Model Architecture 

Having described the dataset and feature engineering deci-sions, this subsection presents the architecture of the proposed 

TailBooster framework. Figure 2 provides an overview of the full pipeline. The framework processes historical flight records through a sequential pipeline comprising two anomaly detec-tion layers, one statistical and one learned from historical data, with a generative stage and a relational validity filter interposed between them. The first anomaly detection layer addresses the well-known tendency of generative models to under-represent distributional tails by supplying tail-concentrated training sig-nal, while the second corrects the complementary failure mode whereby generative models produce records that are statisti-cally plausible but operationally invalid. Together, these com-ponents produce augmented synthetic data with improved ex-treme representativeness and operational validity. Algorithm 1 provides a concise formal summary of the full pipeline, whose components are detailed in the remainder of this subsection. 

A. Input TailBooster takes three inputs: the full historical dataset, hereafter referred to as the Real dataset and denoted D =

{x(i)}Ni=1, where N is the number of historical records and x(i)

6— full historical dataset ("real") — a user-defined  list of  target features name ({"Air Time (min)",  "Arrival T (min)"})                          

> —a user-defined list of operationally correlated features names ,— real historical extremes of target features and
> ,,,,,—operational feature matrix extracted from ,,,,,
> ï— naïve uncleaned synthetic data from with underrepresented extremes ("naïve synthetic")
> — cleaned synthetic data augmented with cleaned synthetic extremes ("augmented synthetic")
> — real historical data augmented with cleaned synthetic extremes ("augmented real") B. Extreme extraction (1 st anomaly detectoin) C. Generation D. Validity filter E. Operational cleaning (2 nd anomaly detectoin) Extract operationally correlated features from historical data
> - inference on
> ï- inference on
> - inference on
> Filtering IQR
> to train
> to train
> to train 1. 2. 3. A. Input F. Output Figure 2. Overview of the TailBooster architecture with two target features.

denotes a single flight record; a user-defined list of target fea-tures T = { f1, . . . , fNtf }, that is, continuous operational met-rics whose distributional tails are of interest; and a user-defined list of operationally correlated feature names Xc, used to train the autoencoder-based anomaly cleaning layer. In the present study, the historical dataset is the U.S. domestic flight record described in Section 3.1, the target features are T = {“Air Time (min)”, “Arrival ∆T (min)” }, giving Ntf = 2, and Xc =

{“ICAO Origin Airport”, “ICAO Destination Airport”, “Air Time (min)”, “Distance (miles)” }. The pipeline produces three datasets from these inputs, described in Section F below, which are subsequently used together with the original Real dataset D

to assess the usefulness of this framework. 

B. IQR-based extreme subset extraction 

This stage constitutes the first of the two anomaly detection layers in the pipeline. It partitions D according to the distri-butional tails of each target feature f j ∈ T . For each f j, let 

Q( j)1 and Q( j)3 denote its first and third quartiles over D. The interquartile range is defined as: IQR ( j) = Q( j)3 − Q( j)1 (1) The extreme subset for target feature f j is then the collection of records whose values fall outside the Tukey fences (Tukey, 1977): 

E( j) =



x ∈ D 

x f j < Q( j)1 − 1.5 · IQR ( j)

or 

x f j > Q( j)3 + 1.5 · IQR ( j)



(2) where x f j denotes the value of feature f j in record x. This operation is performed independently for each target feature, yielding the collection D = {D 0, E(1) , . . . , E(Ntf )} of Ntf + 1datasets, where D0 = D: one extreme subset per target fea-ture plus the full historical record, giving three datasets in total. In the present study, records with “Air Time (min)” values out-side [ −70 .00 , 282 .00] minutes and “Arrival ∆T (min)” values outside [ −65 .50 , 58 .50] minutes are identified as extremes and assigned to E(1) and E(2) , respectively. The IQR-based criterion was selected because it isolates dis-tributional tails without imposing parametric assumptions on the underlying distribution, making it well suited to the mixed-type, heavy-tailed feature space characteristic of operational flight records. The collection D is subsequently used to train the generative models described in Section C. 

C. Generative model training 

One generative model Gk is trained on each dataset Dk ∈ D:one on the full historical record D0 to preserve nominal pat-terns, and one on each extreme subset E(k) for k = 1, . . . , Ntf 

to amplify the tail-region training signal for the corresponding 7target feature. In the present study, the Tabular Variational Au-toencoder (TVAE) (Xu et al., 2019) is used as the generative model. The TVAE extends the conventional variational autoen-coder (Kingma and Welling, 2013) to mixed-type tabular data by pairing a probabilistic encoder qϕ(z | x), which maps each input record x to a distribution over a continuous latent space Z,and a decoder pθ(x | z) that reconstructs the record from a sam-pled latent vector z. Training maximises the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) on the marginal log-likelihood of the data: 

LELBO (θ, ϕ ; x) =

Ez∼qϕ(z|x)

log pθ(x | z) − DKL 

qϕ(z | x) ∥ p(z) (3) where the first term encourages accurate reconstruction of the input from its latent representation, and the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence term (Kingma and Welling, 2013) regularises the approximate posterior qϕ(z | x) towards the prior p(z), en-suring a well-structured and continuous latent space from which new records can be sampled (Shen et al., 2024). The TVAE was selected for this study given its training sta-bility, reliable convergence, and reduced susceptibility to mode collapse relative to GAN-based architectures, as well as its lower computational cost compared to di ff usion-based models. The framework is nonetheless generative-model-agnostic: the TVAE can be substituted with a conditional GAN or any other tabular generative model without modifying any other compo-nent of the pipeline. Once all generative models are trained, records are sam-pled independently from each of them to produce a synthetic dataset. The sampling ratio r = 1.2 was set to compensate for the records expected to be removed during the subsequent post-generation filtering stages, ensuring that the final synthetic dataset retains a su ffi cient number of records relative to the original training data. Since G0 is trained on the full histori-cal record, its synthetic output ˜S0 is subject to the well-known tendency of deep generative models to concentrate probability mass in high-density regions of the data distribution, resulting in poor representation of the less frequent extreme observations of the target features T relative to the dominant nominal cases (Huster et al., 2021; Bhatia et al., 2021). In contrast, each Gk for 

k = 1, . . . , Ntf produces synthetic extremes ˜Sk corresponding to 

E(k). Each synthetic dataset is then passed separately through the relational validity filter (Section D) and the autoencoder-based operational cleaning layer (Section E). 

D. Relational validity filter 

Before operational cleaning is applied, each synthetic record from the previous stage is subjected to a rejection sampling step that removes records whose origin–destination airport pair is absent from the historical data. Formally, let PD = {(o(i), d(i)) : 

x(i) ∈ D} be the set of all origin–destination pairs observed in the historical records. A synthetic record ˜ x with origin airport ˜o and destination airport ˜ d is accepted if and only if ( ˜ o, ˜d) ∈PD, and discarded otherwise. This ensures that all remaining records correspond to operationally plausible routes observed in the historical data. Applying this filter to each ˜Sk indepen-dently yields the corresponding validity-filtered datasets ˜Svalid 

> k

for k = 0, . . . , Ntf , which are subsequently passed to the op-erational cleaning layer in Section E. In particular, ˜Svalid 0 is hereafter denoted Snaïve and referred to as the Naïve Synthetic dataset, representing the baseline output of a conventional gen-erative approach trained on the full historical record, without operational cleaning or targeted extreme value augmentation. 

E. Autoencoder-based operational cleaning 

This stage constitutes the second anomaly detection layer. It operates in two phases: a training phase, in which one au-toencoder is trained once per dataset in D to learn the opera-tional correlations between features in real historical records, and an operational cleaning phase, in which the pre-trained au-toencoders are applied to remove synthetic records that violate empirically learned operational norms. For each dataset Dk ∈ D, the operationally correlated feature matrix X(k) 

> c

is extracted from Dk using the user-defined feature names Xc. A standard autoencoder (Hinton and Salakhutdinov, 2006), comprising an encoder f (k) 

> ϕ

and a decoder g(k) 

> θ

, is then trained on X(k) 

> c

by minimising the mean squared reconstruction loss over its |X(k) 

> c

| records: 

LAE (θ(k), ϕ (k)) = 1

|X(k) 

> c

|

X 

> x(i)
> c∈X(k)
> c

x(i) 

> c

− g(k)

> θ

 f (k)

> ϕ

x(i)

> c

 22 (4) where x(i) 

> c

denotes the operational feature vector of record i

in X(k) 

> c

. By learning to reconstruct these features jointly, each autoencoder internalises the inter-feature constraints that char-acterise valid flight operations within its training distribution, for instance the proportionality between route distance and air time, without requiring domain-specific symbolic encoding. For each k, once ( f (k) 

> ϕ

, g(k) 

> θ

) is trained, the per-record reconstruc-tion error is computed as: 

e(k)(xc) = xc − g(k)

> θ

 f (k) 

> ϕ

(xc) 22 (5) where xc denotes the operational feature vector of any record passed to autoencoder k. The anomaly threshold τk is set at the p-th percentile of reconstruction errors computed on X(k)

> c

(Sakurada and Yairi, 2014); p = 99 was chosen to ensure a conservative threshold, minimising the risk of discarding oper-ationally valid synthetic records: 

τk = Pp

n e(k)x(i)

> c

o  

> x(i)
> c∈X(k)
> c



(6) Once all autoencoders are trained, the operational cleaning phase begins. A synthetic record ˜ x from ˜Svalid  

> k

is discarded as operationally invalid if e(k)( ˜ xc) > τ k, where ˜ xc is its opera-tional feature vector. This threshold retains the vast majority of operationally plausible synthetic records while removing those that no physically consistent flight could produce. Applying this cleaning step to each ˜Svalid  

> k

independently yields the corre-sponding cleaned datasets ˜Scleaned  

> k

for k = 0, . . . , Ntf , which are subsequently used to construct the output datasets described in Section F. 8F. Output 

The pipeline produces three datasets used to evaluate the use-fulness of the TailBooster framework: 

(1) Naïve Synthetic ( Snaïve ). As defined in Section D, Snaïve =

˜Svalid 0 is the validity-filtered output of G0, the generative model trained on the full historical record D0, without operational cleaning or targeted extreme value augmentation. The Naïve Synthetic dataset serves as the baseline representative of con-ventional synthetic data generation, against which the improve-ments introduced by the full TailBooster pipeline are assessed. 

(2) Augmented Synthetic ( Saug ). Synthetic records ˜Scleaned  

> k

for 

k = 0, . . . , Ntf that survive both the validity filter and the sec-ond anomaly detection layer are merged to constitute the Aug-mented Synthetic dataset, denoted Saug . This dataset is the pri-mary output of TailBooster : by comparing it against Snaïve , the evaluation isolates the improvement that the dual-layer frame-work achieves over conventional synthetic data generation. 

(3) Augmented Real ( Daug ). The cleaned synthetic extreme records ˜Scleaned  

> k

for k = 1, . . . , Ntf , produced by the genera-tive models trained on each E(k) and surviving both filtering stages, are combined with the real historical data to form the Augmented Real dataset, denoted Daug . This dataset demon-strates the utility gain achievable when the real historical record is directly enriched with operationally valid synthetic extremes produced by TailBooster .In addition to these three pipeline outputs, the original Real dataset D serves as the reference for all comparative evalua-tions. Table 2 summarises the size of each of the four datasets and the number of extreme records per target feature; they are subsequently compared across the evaluation dimensions de-scribed in Section 3.3 to assess the contribution of extreme aug-mentation and operational cleaning to operational validity and downstream predictive performance on extreme values.                   

> Dataset Records Extremes of “Air Time (min)” Extremes of “Arrival ∆T (min)”
> Real ( D)60 ,767 3,726 5,470 Naïve synthetic ( Snaïve )62 ,803 2,751 5,136 Augmented synthetic ( Saug )68 ,335 6,255 9,938 Augmented real ( Daug )69 ,390 7,509 10 ,546 Table 2. S ize of each dataset and number of extreme records per target fea -
> ture . A ll datasets comprise 30 features .

Algorithm 1: TailBooster 

Input: 

D = {x(i)}Ni=1 — Real dataset 

T = { f1, . . . , fNtf } — target features 

Xc — operationally correlated feature names 

p = 99 — anomaly threshold percentile 

r = 1.2 — sampling ratio 

Output: 

Snaïve , Saug , Daug 

IQR-based extreme subset extraction (1st anomaly detection layer)  

> 1:

for each target feature f j ∈ T do  

> 2:

Compute Q( j)1 , Q( j)3 , and IQR ( j) ← Q( j)3 − Q( j)1 

> 3:

Extract E( j) using Equation (2)  

> 4:

end for  

> 5:

Form collection D ← {D 0, E(1) , . . . , E(Ntf )} where D0 = D

Autoencoder training (2nd anomaly detection layer — train-ing phase) 

// Autoencoder training precedes generative model training in the execution order, as each autoencoder is trained once on real data and then applied post-generation for opera-tional cleaning.  

> 6:

for each dataset Dk ∈ D do  

> 7:

Extract matrix X(k) 

> c

from Dk using feature names Xc 

> 8:

Train autoencoder ( f (k) 

> ϕ

, g(k) 

> θ

) on X(k) 

> c

by minimising 

LAE (Equation (4))  

> 9:

Compute τk ← Pp

 {e(k)(x(i) 

> c

)}x(i) 

> c∈X(k)
> c

 using Equation (6)  

> 10:

end for Generative model training (default: TVAE)  

> 11:

for each dataset Dk ∈ D do  

> 12:

Train generative model Gk on Dk 

> 13:

Set sample size nk ← ⌊ r · |D k|⌋  

> 14:

Sample synthetic dataset ˜Sk ← G k(nk) 

> 15:

end for 

// k=0: ˜S0 is sampled from G0 trained on the full historical record D0 = D, with extremes of T under-represented 

// k = 1, . . . , Ntf : ˜Sk are synthetic extremes corresponding to E(k)

Relational validity filtering and operational cleaning (2nd anomaly detection layer — inference phase)  

> 16:

Initialise Saug ← ∅  

> 17:

for each ˜Sk ∈ { ˜S0, ˜S1, . . . , ˜SNtf } do 

// Relational validity filter  

> 18:

˜Svalid  

> k

← { ˜x ∈ ˜Sk : (˜ o, ˜d) ∈ P D}

// Operational cleaning  

> 19:

˜Scleaned  

> k

← { ˜x ∈ ˜Svalid  

> k

: e(k)( ˜ xc) ≤ τk} 

> 20:

Saug ← Saug ∪ ˜Scleaned  

> k

// “augmented synthetic” dataset  

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

Snaïve ← ˜Svalid 0 // “naïve synthetic” dataset  

> 23:

Daug ← D ∪  S Ntf  

> k=1

˜Scleaned 

> k

 // “augmented real” dataset  

> 24:

return Snaïve , Saug , Daug 

93.3. Evaluation Framework 

Credibility is a prerequisite for any synthetic dataset in-tended to support downstream analysis; without it, the gener-ated records risk propagating structural errors into any model trained on them. Accordingly, each generated dataset was sub-jected to a set of structural integrity checks, verifying that the number of features was preserved, that continuous variables re-mained within the ranges observed in the real data, and that dis-crete attributes were confined to their original categories. Be-yond these structural checks, five complementary dimensions of quality were assessed. As summarised in Table 3, these di-mensions are not evaluated with the same objective: diversity, statistical similarity, and fidelity serve as preservation checks, confirming that the gains achieved in the target dimensions do not come at the cost of losing qualities that conventional gen-eration already achieves, while operational validity and utility constitute the primary improvement targets of TailBooster .           

> Evaluation dimension TailBooster scope
> Diversity (coverage of historical patterns) To preserve Statistical similarity To preserve Fidelity (indistinguishability from real data) To preserve Operational validity of synthetic records To improve Utility in predicting extremes To improve Table 3. S cope of TailBooster framework ,relative to conventional genera -
> tive approaches .

3.3.1. Diversity Assessment 

Diversity constitutes the first of three preservation checks. A synthetic dataset is considered diverse if its generated records span the full range of patterns present in the real data. It was assessed through visual inspection of distributional coverage across three pairwise comparisons: (i) Real vs. Naïve Synthetic, (ii) Real vs. Augmented Synthetic, and (iii) Real vs. Augmented Real. In each comparison, two complementary dimensional-ity reduction methods were applied to both datasets: Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Wold et al., 1987), which recovers linear structure, and t-distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embed-ding (t-SNE) (van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008), which pre-serves non-linear neighbourhood relationships. Both methods were used to project the datasets into two-dimensional space, thereby allowing direct visual comparison of the underlying clusters. While improving diversity is not an objective of Tail-Booster , this dimension was evaluated to confirm that the pro-cess of extremes augmentation and operational cleaning does not degrade the range of representation already present in the real data; limited variability in synthetic records risks introduc-ing systematic bias into any downstream model trained on them. 

3.3.2. Statistical Assessment 

The second preservation check concerns statistical similar-ity: how closely the distributions of synthetic and real records align, assessed at both the marginal and bivariate levels. The same three pairwise comparisons were conducted: (i) Real vs. Naïve Synthetic, (ii) Real vs. Augmented Synthetic, and (iii) Real vs. Augmented Real. At the univariate level, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was applied to numerical and date-time features (Viehmann, 2021), while Total Variation Distance was used for categorical and boolean attributes (Knoblauch and Vomfell, 2020). Pairwise relationships were further quantified through Correlation Similarity for numerical feature pairs (SD-Metrics Developers, 2023b) and Contingency Similarity for cat-egorical ones (SDMetrics Developers, 2023a). Although Tail-Booster does not target improvement in statistical similarity, this dimension was assessed to verify that the augmentation process does not distort the distributional characteristics of the real data; evaluating both univariate and bivariate agreement guarded against the misleading conclusions that can arise when distributional similarity is judged solely at the individual fea-ture level. 

3.3.3. Fidelity Assessment 

The third and final preservation check is fidelity. A syn-thetic dataset exhibits high fidelity when its records are sta-tistically indistinguishable from real ones; it was measured by training a binary classifier to discriminate between the two, on the basis that a classifier that cannot reliably distinguish be-tween them is taken as evidence of higher fidelity in the gen-erated data. A Random Forest classifier was employed given its well-established capacity to model complex, non-linear fea-ture interactions (Breiman, 2001). To account for the size dis-parity between the compared datasets and to ensure robust es-timates, stratified five-fold cross-validation with shu ffl ing was applied (Ahmadi et al., 2024). Performance was quantified us-ing the F1 score and balanced accuracy (Sokolova and Lapalme, 2009); the latter assigns equal weight to both classes irrespec-tive of their relative frequency, making it appropriate for imbal-anced classification tasks. Two comparisons were evaluated: (i) Real vs. Naïve Synthetic, and (ii) Real vs. Augmented Syn-thetic. The Real vs. Augmented Real comparison was omitted because real instances are shared between both datasets, ren-dering the classification task uninformative. Each comparison was repeated across three data subsets: the full dataset (nominal and extreme cases combined), records with extreme “Air Time (min)”, and records with extreme “Arrival ∆T (min)”, yielding six tests in total. Indistinguishability alone does not preclude memorisation, since a generative model could achieve high fidelity scores sim-ply by reproducing training samples. To guard against this, the Distance to Closest Record (DCR) was computed for each synthetic sample (Park et al., 2018) as a test of memorisation. DCR measures the Euclidean distance between each synthetic record and its closest counterpart in the real dataset, computed exclusively on numerical features after applying z-score nor-malisation fitted to the real data. Each cleaned synthetic dataset ( ˜Scleaned 0 , ˜Scleaned 1 , and ˜Scleaned 2 ) was evaluated against its paired real dataset ( D0, E(1) , and E(2) , respectively), which was used to train the corresponding generative model. To establish a ref-erence, a real-to-real baseline mean ¯ dreal ,k was computed as the mean nearest-neighbour distance among real records in each paired dataset, excluding self-matches (Platzer and Reutterer, 10 2021). The DCR ratio is defined as the mean synthetic-to-real DCR normalised by ¯dreal ,k; a ratio greater than or equal to 1 indicates that synthetic samples are, on average, no closer to real records than real samples are to one another, provid-ing evidence against memorisation. As a secondary check, a memorisation threshold τDCR ,k = 0.10 × ¯dreal ,k was defined for each synthesiser k ∈ { 0, 1, 2}; any synthetic record with DCR below τDCR ,k was flagged as a potential near-copy and subse-quently inspected manually to distinguish memorised copies from near-neighbours di ff ering only in continuous time-valued fields. While neither fidelity improvement nor memorisation prevention is a primary objective of the proposed framework, measuring both serves as a safeguard against unintended qual-ity degradation introduced by the augmentation and cleaning process. 

3.3.4. Operational Validity Assessment 

Operational validity is the first of TailBooster ’s two primary improvement targets. A synthetic flight record is considered operationally valid if it respects the empirical correlations be-tween operational attributes observed in the real data, such as the expected relationship between flight distance and air time. This was evaluated by examining two pairwise operational cor-relations: “Air Time (min)” against “Distance (miles)”, and “Arrival ∆T (min)” against “Distance (miles)”, across three comparisons: (i) Real vs. Naïve Synthetic, (ii) Real vs. Aug-mented Synthetic, and (iii) Real vs. Augmented Real. In our prior work (Aly and Sharpanskykh, 2025; Aly et al., 2026), synthetic datasets consistently contained implausible records, such as unrealistically short flight times for long-haul routes, indicating violations of operational feasibility. Addressing this limitation is a central objective of the TailBooster framework, specifically the second anomaly detection layer, which enforces operational feasibility by filtering records that violate the em-pirical operational envelope learned from the historical data. 

3.3.5. Utility Assessment 

Utility in predicting extreme values is TailBooster ’s princi-pal improvement target. Concretely, it measures the reduc-tion in prediction error—quantified via Mean Absolute Error (MAE)—on extreme values achieved by training on augmented data, relative to baselines trained on real or naïve synthetic data alone, reflecting the practical benefit of more accurate predic-tion of severe delays and air times. Both training and testing were conducted exclusively on the extremes of each target fea-ture, as nominal records’ numerical dominance would other-wise mask genuine gains in extreme-value prediction. Utility was assessed by comparing four scenarios: (i) Train on Real, Test on Real; (ii) Train on Naïve Synthetic, Test on Real; (iii) Train on Augmented Synthetic, Test on Real; and (iv) Train on Augmented Real, Test on Real. This four-scenario structure was applied once to records with extreme “Air Time (min)” and again to records with extreme “Arrival ∆T (min)”. Only the real dataset was partitioned into training and test sub-sets; all other datasets were used exclusively for training. Shuf-fling was applied during the real-data split to ensure that the test set captured the full spectrum of extreme values. Six regres-sion algorithms were employed: (i) Random Forest Regression (Breiman, 2001), which reduces variance through bagging and is robust to overfitting in mixed-type feature spaces; (ii) XG-Boost Regression (Chen and Guestrin, 2016), a regularised gradient-boosted ensemble with strong general-purpose predic-tive performance; (iii) CatBoost Regression (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018), which natively handles categorical features with-out requiring manual encoding; (iv) LightGBM Regression (Ke et al., 2017), selected for its computational e ffi ciency and ef-fective handling of mixed feature types; (v) Support Vector Regression (Drucker et al., 1997), chosen for its robustness to outliers via the epsilon-insensitive loss formulation; and (vi) k-Nearest Neighbours Regression (Cover and Hart, 1967), which provides a non-parametric, assumption-free baseline sensitive to local structural patterns. Examining utility across multi-ple regression algorithms ensures that the findings are not spe-cific to any single model family and that the observed gains in extreme-value prediction are robust across a range of inductive biases. Prediction was conducted in the tactical phase, using only information available at the time of take-o ff (Table 1); any time-related feature that could indirectly encode the actual ar-rival time was withheld to guard against information leakage. This constraint is consistent with the requirements of real-world operational deployment (Mas-Pujol and Delgado, 2024). The four-scenario comparison provides direct evidence of the con-tribution made by the operational cleaning process and the extreme-value augmentation to the prediction of operationally significant events, specifically extreme air times and extreme arrival delays. 

3.4. Hyperparameter Tuning 

The hyperparameters of each generative model were tuned using the multi-objective optimisation framework we proposed in Aly et al. (2026), employing the Tree-structured Parzen Es-timator (TPE) algorithm (Akiba et al., 2019). TPE constructs two non-parametric density estimators over the hyperparam-eter space: one for configurations associated with good per-formance, and another for those with poor performance. New trials are sampled from regions where the ratio between these densities is maximised, making TPE more sample-e ffi cient than grid or random search and well suited to high-dimensional hy-perparameter spaces with mixed variable types (Bergstra et al., 2011). In Aly et al. (2026), we provided a detailed justification of the objective function weights and a sensitivity analysis of synthetic data quality across di ff erent weight configurations. Three TVAE hyperparameters were included in the search: the embedding dimension, the encoder layer widths (two layers, tuned independently), and the number of training epochs. The decoder layer widths were fixed as the mirror of the encoder, en-suring a symmetric architecture and reducing the search space without introducing an additional degree of freedom. Table 4 summarises the search space for all three parameters. 11 Hyperparameter Search space                             

> Embedding dimension {8,16 ,32 ,64 ,128 ,200 ,256 ,300 ,400 ,500 ,600 }
> Encoder layer width (each) {8,16 ,32 ,64 ,128 ,200 ,256 ,300 ,400 ,500 ,600 }
> Training epochs {300 ,400 , . . . , 6000 }(step: 100) Table 4. TVAE hyperparameter search space .

Each optimisation run was capped at 100 trials. The 10 initial trials were allocated to random exploration before TPE began directing the search, following the standard warm-up protocol (Akiba et al., 2019). 

4. Results 

This section evaluates the TailBooster framework by compar-ing the four datasets defined in Section F: Real ( D), Naïve Syn-thetic ( Snaïve ), Augmented Synthetic ( Saug ), and Augmented Real ( Daug ). The comparison between Snaïve and Saug isolates the contribution of the proposed dual-layer pipeline over con-ventional synthetic data generation. Since both datasets pass through the relational validity filter, this comparison reflects the added benefit of both the extreme-value augmentation and op-erational cleaning. The comparison between D and Daug quan-tifies the benefit of enriching the real historical record with op-erationally valid synthetic extremes. The results are organised into five subsections, each corresponding to one of the evalua-tion dimensions described in Section 3.3. As summarised in Ta-ble 3, diversity, statistical similarity, and fidelity are assessed as preservation checks, while operational validity and utility con-stitute the primary improvement targets of the framework. 

4.1. Diversity Assessment 

Figure 3 presents the PCA and t-SNE projections for the three pairwise comparisons. In all panels, real data are plot-ted in blue beneath the comparison dataset, so that the degree to which the synthetic or augmented records cover the real clus-ters can be assessed visually. The PCA projections reveal a clear discrete cluster struc-ture, with three primary groupings along the first principal com-ponent, each internally stratified into several sub-clusters. In the Naïve Synthetic comparison (Figure 3a), synthetic records overlap with all real clusters, confirming that conventional generation—a single model trained on the full data, validity-filtered but with no extreme-value augmentation or operational cleaning—captures the broad structure of the feature space. The Augmented Synthetic comparison (Figure 3c) shows im-proved within-cluster coverage: for instance, six of the seven sub-clusters in the left-hand grouping are fully covered, with the real data points no longer visibly exposed. The Aug-mented Real comparison (Figure 3e) achieves complete cov-erage across all clusters by construction, as it incorporates the real historical records directly, with extremes better represented through augmentation. The corresponding t-SNE projections (Figures 3b, 3d, and 3f) confirm this pattern at the level of non-linear neighbourhood structure: all three datasets reproduce the broad topology of the real data manifold. Although diversity improvement was not an objective of the framework, these re-sults confirm that the TailBooster pipeline does not degrade di-versity, with the Augmented Synthetic showing modest gains over the Naïve Synthetic.    

> (a) PCA: Real vs. Naïve Synth. (b) t-SNE: Real vs. Naïve Synth.
> (c) PCA: Real vs. Aug. Synth. (d) t-SNE: Real vs. Aug. Synth.
> (e) PCA: Real vs. Aug. Real (f) t-SNE: Real vs. Aug. Real
> Figure 3. Diversity comparison of real (blue), naïve synthetic (red), augmented synthetic (orange), and augmented real (green) flight records.

4.2. Statistical Assessment 

Table 5 reports the statistical similarity scores across the same three pairwise comparisons. The second column reports marginal similarity, the mean of the Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Total Variation Distance scores across all features, measur-ing univariate distributional agreement. The third column re-ports bivariate similarity, the mean of Correlation Similarity and Contingency Similarity scores across all feature pairs, cap-turing pairwise inter-feature relationships. The fourth column reports overall similarity, the mean of the two.            

> Comparison Marginal Similarity (%) Bivariate Similarity (%) Overall Similarity (%)
> Real vs. Naïve Synthetic 86.43 73.53 79.98 Real vs. Augmented Synthetic 90.05 82.47 86.26 Real vs. Augmented Real 96.72 92.47 94.60 Table 5. S tatistical similarity scores across the three pairwise comparisons
> (higher is better ). O verall similarity is the mean of marginal and bivariate similarity .

12 All three comparisons achieved high statistical similarity scores, confirming that neither the augmentation nor the clean-ing process corrupts the distributional characteristics of the real data. The Naïve Synthetic dataset achieved an overall similarity of 79.98%, reflecting the baseline performance of conventional generation. The Augmented Synthetic improved on this, reach-ing 86.26%, suggesting that the dual-layer pipeline does not de-grade and in fact marginally improves statistical similarity rel-ative to the naïve baseline. The Augmented Real achieved the highest overall similarity of 94.60%, which is expected given that it directly incorporates the real historical records. The most notable gains across all three datasets are observed in bi-variate similarity, where the Augmented Synthetic improved by 8.94 percentage points over the Naïve Synthetic (82.47% vs. 73.53%), indicating that the operational cleaning process, by enforcing empirical inter-feature correlations, also strengthens the bivariate distributional agreement between synthetic and real records. 

4.3. Fidelity Assessment 

The discriminability check was conducted across six tests, as described in Section 3.3.3, and the results are summarised in Table 6. Understanding these results requires first considering the composition of each synthetic dataset. Recall from Figure 2 that the naïve synthetic dataset Snaïve = ˜Svalid 0 is the validity-filtered output of G0, the generative model trained on the full historical dataset D, with no operational cleaning or extreme-value augmentation; it represents the baseline output of con-ventional synthetic data generation. The augmented synthetic dataset Saug , by contrast, merges the operationally cleaned out-puts of three generative models: G0, trained on the full data, and 

G1 and G2, each trained exclusively on the real extreme subset of one target feature. Since both datasets pass through the re-lational validity filter, the fidelity di ff erence between them re-flects the e ff ect of operational cleaning and extreme-value aug-mentation alone. Two distinct patterns emerged depending on whether the classifier operated on the full dataset—comprising nominal and extreme cases—or on the extreme subsets of each target feature.                             

> Subset Comparison F1 Balanced Accuracy Overall Discriminability
> Full dataset (nominal +extremes) Real vs. Naïve Synthetic 0.88 0.88 0.88 Real vs. Augmented Synthetic 0.77 0.79 0.78 Extremes of “Air Time (min)” Real vs. Naïve Synthetic 0.94 0.89 0.92 Real vs. Augmented Synthetic 0.47 0.62 0.54 Extremes of “Arrival ∆T (min)” Real vs. Naïve Synthetic 0.88 0.88 0.88 Real vs. Augmented Synthetic 0.50 0.65 0.58 Table 6. D iscriminability check results across all six tests (lower is better ). Overall discriminability is the mean of F1 and balanced accuracy .

When evaluated on the full dataset, discriminability was high in both comparisons, with overall discriminability scores of 0.88 for Real vs. Snaïve and 0.78 for Real vs. Saug . This is expected: both synthetic datasets are dominated by nomi-nal records generated by the same model G0, so the classifier faced a largely similar task in both cases. The modest reduc-tion in discriminability when moving from Snaïve to Saug re-flects two compounding e ff ects. First, out of 62 ,803 records in Snaïve , 3 ,091 were flagged as anomalies by the autoencoder-based cleaning layer for violating the operational correlations learned from the historical data and subsequently removed. Second, ˜Scleaned 1 and ˜Scleaned 2 contributed 3 ,688 extreme “Air Time (min)” records and 4 ,935 extreme “Arrival ∆T (min)” records, respectively, both of higher fidelity and operational validity than the corresponding extreme records in Snaïve . To-gether, these changes make Saug harder to distinguish from the real data than Snaïve . However, since the extreme records from 

G1 and G2 constitute a minority of the full dataset, their contri-bution to discriminability reduction is diluted by the dominant nominal majority, which is similarly generated in both cases, limiting the overall gain. The second pattern was observed when the evaluation was restricted to the extreme subsets. For the extremes of “Air Time (min)”, overall discriminability fell from 0.92 for Real vs. Snaïve 

to 0.54 for Real vs. Saug ; for the extremes of “Arrival ∆T (min)”, it fell from 0.88 to 0.58. These drops are substantially larger than those observed at the full-dataset level and reflect a fun-damental di ff erence in the origin of the extreme records being compared. In the naïve case, the extreme subset of Snaïve con-sists of records generated by G0 that happen to fall in the tail of the target feature distribution; since G0 was trained on the full data and never received tail-concentrated training signal, and since these records were not subject to operational clean-ing, they are poor representatives of real extremes and are eas-ily distinguished from them by the classifier. In the augmented case, the extreme subset of Saug mostly consists of records from 

G1 and G2, each trained directly on the corresponding real ex-treme subset and subsequently filtered by the relational valid-ity filter and the autoencoder-based operational cleaning layer. These records faithfully capture the distributional characteris-tics of real extremes, making the classification task substan-tially harder and reducing discriminability accordingly. Al-though indistinguishability was not an optimisation target, the consistently lower discriminability of Saug relative to Snaïve , at both the full-dataset level and across both extreme subsets, con-firms that TailBooster ’s targeted extreme augmentation yields fidelity gains beyond those achievable with conventional gener-ation alone. As noted in Section 3.3.3, high indistinguishability alone does not rule out memorisation. Table 7 reports the DCR-based memorisation check results for the three cleaned syn-thetic datasets. All three datasets produced DCR ratios greater than 1 (1.22, 1.28, and 1.15 for ˜Scleaned 0 , ˜Scleaned 1 , and ˜Scleaned 2 , re-spectively), indicating that synthetic records were, on average, more dispersed from the real data manifold than real records were from one another. For ˜Scleaned 1 and ˜Scleaned 2 , no record fell below the memorisation threshold τDCR ,k, providing no ev-idence of memorisation in the synthetic extremes. For ˜Scleaned 0 ,14 records out of 59 ,712 (0.02%) were flagged as potential copies of real data. However, manual inspection revealed that 13 of these were flagged primarily due to an exact match in categorical and route attributes with their nearest real neigh-bour, while di ff ering in continuous time-valued fields by no 13 more than a few minutes; this pattern is consistent with gener-alisation rather than memorisation. Only one of the 14 flagged records was found to be an exact duplicate, corresponding to a rate of 0.002% of the dataset; this isolated case is attributable to the high frequency of the corresponding origin–destination pair in the training data. Overall, these results indicate that the 

TailBooster pipeline does not memorise its training data to any meaningful degree.                          

> Synthetic dataset Mean DCR DCR ratio τDCR ,kFlagged (%)
> ˜Scleaned 00.5191 1.2212 0.0425 0.02 ˜Scleaned 10.8624 1.2763 0.0676 0.00 ˜Scleaned 20.6310 1.1470 0.0550 0.00 Table 7. DCR-based memorisation check per synthetic dataset . E ach dataset is evaluated against its paired real training set .DCR ratio ≥1indicates no systematic proximity to real records . R ecords with DCR < τ DCR ,kare flagged as potential near -copies .

4.4. Operational Assessment 

Figure 4 presents the pairwise operational correlations for the three comparisons. In all panels, real data are plotted in blue be-neath the comparison dataset, allowing direct visual assessment of how closely the synthetic or augmented records adhere to the operational envelope of the real data.    

> (a) Real vs. Naïve Synth. (b) Real vs. Naïve Synth.
> (c) Real vs. Aug. Synth. (d) Real vs. Aug. Synth.
> (e) Real vs. Aug. Real (f) Real vs. Aug. Real
> Figure 4. Operational correlation in real (blue), naïve synthetic (red), augmented synthetic (orange), and augmented real (green) flight records.

Figures 4a and 4b illustrate the limitations of conventional generation. In Figure 4a, the naïve synthetic records fail to cover the extreme air times observed in the real data and include implausible records whose air time–distance pairs fall outside the ranges historically observed for the same routes, violating the operational correlation between flight distance and air time. Figure 4b reveals an even more pronounced failure: the naïve synthetic fails to reproduce the extreme arrival delays present in the real data, with its records concentrated well below the upper tail of the real distribution, which extends to delays of several hundred minutes across all distances. Figures 4c and 4d demonstrate the combined e ff ect of the two anomaly detection layers. Figure 4c shows the improvement for “Air Time (min)”: the extreme air times at long-haul distances, absent from Figure 4a, are now covered through augmentation from G1. The implausible air time–distance pairs visible in Figure 4a, whose values fall outside the historical ranges, are absent from Figure 4c, reflecting the e ff ect of the autoencoder-based cleaning layer, which was trained on the operationally correlated features (“ICAO Origin Airport”, “ICAO Destination Airport”, “Air Time (min)”, and “Distance (miles)”) to learn the empirical operational envelope of historical flight records and remove synthetic records that violate it. In Figure 4d, the ex-treme arrival delays are now better represented across the full range observed in the real data, reflecting the direct contribu-tion of G2, the generative model trained exclusively on the real extreme subset of “Arrival ∆T (min)”. Figures 4e and 4f show near-perfect adherence to the real data in both correlations, as the augmented real dataset directly incorporates the historical records by construction, augmented with synthetic extremes from G1 and G2.Taken together, these results demonstrate the compounding impact of the two anomaly detection layers of TailBooster over conventional generation: the first layer captures and augments the under-represented extremes of user-defined target features, while the second enforces operational validity in a data-driven fashion by learning the empirical operational envelope directly from the historical data. This addresses a limitation consis-tently observed in our prior work, where synthetic datasets produced by conventional generative models contained opera-tionally implausible records (Aly and Sharpanskykh, 2025; Aly et al., 2026). 

4.5. Utility Assessment 

Table 8 reports the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of all six regression models across the four training scenarios for both target features, where all models were trained and tested exclu-sively on the extreme subsets of each target feature, excluding nominal records as described in Section 3.3.5. Lower MAE indicates better predictive performance on these extreme sub-sets. Two comparisons are of primary interest: the improve-ment achieved by training on the Augmented Synthetic dataset (Saug ) over the Naïve Synthetic dataset ( Snaive ), which quan-tifies the benefit of the dual-layer pipeline over conventional synthetic data generation, and the improvement achieved by training on the Augmented Real dataset ( Daug ) over the Real 14 dataset ( D), which quantifies the benefit of enriching real his-torical data with operationally valid synthetic extremes. For the prediction of extreme “Air Time (min)”, training on the Augmented Synthetic reduced MAE substantially relative to the Naïve Synthetic across all six models, from a range of 19.40–23.58 min to 10.21–12.23 min, representing per-model reductions of approximately 47–49%. This improvement di-rectly reflects the contribution of the dual-layer pipeline: the extreme-value augmentation from G1 provides training sig-nal on extreme air times that conventional generation lacks, while the operational cleaning layer ensures that the augmented records respect the empirical air time–distance envelope. Sim-ilarly, training on the Augmented Real consistently outper-formed training on the Real dataset alone across all models, re-ducing MAE from 6.34–9.88 min to 2.57–8.59 min, confirming that augmenting the historical record with operationally valid synthetic extremes yields measurable gains in extreme-value prediction even when real data are available. A qualitatively identical pattern was observed for the predic-tion of extreme “Arrival ∆T (min)”, though with larger absolute MAE values reflecting the greater variability of this target fea-ture. Training on the Augmented Synthetic reduced MAE rel-ative to the Naïve Synthetic from a range of 34.41–47.58 min to 14.89–34.00 min, a reduction of approximately 29–57% de-pending on the model. Training on the Augmented Real again outperformed training on the Real dataset alone across all mod-els (4.49–24.77 min vs. 11.54–32.93 min). Figure 5 provides an additional dimension for interpreting the utility results, plotting the real against the predicted “Ar-rival ∆T (min)” for XGBoost trained exclusively on records with extreme “Arrival ∆T (min)” from each of the four datasets: Real, Naïve Synthetic, Augmented Synthetic, and Augmented Real, and tested on a held-out set of real extremes. Accordingly, nominal records, defined as those with “Arrival ∆T (min)” val-ues in the range [ −65 .50 , 58 .50] minutes, are absent from all four panels. The black diagonal represents perfect prediction; points deviating from this diagonal indicate poor predictive per-formance. Figure 5b illustrates the poor utility of conventionally gener-ated synthetic data for an extreme-value prediction task, with the regression model severely under-predicting extreme arrival delays, its predictions collapsing into a narrow band regardless of the actual extreme value. Figure 5c, on the other hand, shows the improvement achieved by TailBooster : targeted extreme-value augmentation and operational cleaning substantially im-prove the coverage of extreme predictions relative to the naïve case, though some deviation from the diagonal remains at the upper tail. Figure 5a shows that a regression model trained exclusively on real historical extremes still struggles to predict the most extreme arrival delays, with points corresponding to the high-est real values deviating noticeably from the diagonal. In con-trast, Figure 5d demonstrates that augmenting the real histori-cal extremes with operationally valid synthetic extremes from 

TailBooster and retraining the regression model on the com-bined dataset substantially closes this gap: the predictions align closely with the diagonal across the full range of extreme val-ues, yielding the best predictive performance of the four sce-narios. While Figure 5 presents results for predicting extreme “Arrival ∆T (min)” only, the same pattern was observed for the prediction of extreme “Air Time (min)”.    

> (a) Trained on Real (b) Trained on Naïve Synth.
> (c) Trained on Aug. Synth. (d) Trained on Aug. Real
> Figure 5. Predicted vs. real “Arrival ∆T (min)” for XGBoost trained on the Real (blue), Naïve Synthetic (red), Augmented Synthetic (orange), and Augmented Real (green) datasets. The black diagonal represents perfect prediction.

The consistency of these gains across all six models, span-ning three distinct regression families, namely tree-based en-sembles (Random Forest, XGBoost, CatBoost, and LightGBM, representing both bagging and boosting approaches), kernel-based regression (SVR), and instance-based methods ( k-NN), confirms that the observed improvements are a property of the augmented data rather than of any particular prediction approach, reinforcing the generalisability of the TailBooster 

framework. These findings were corroborated by RMSE and R2 metrics, which, while not reported separately for concise-ness, showed trends consistent with the MAE results across all models and both target features. Together, these results highlight the advantage of TailBooster 

over conventional synthetic data generation methods. The framework is not only valuable for generating synthetic data in settings where access to real data is limited or unavailable, but also in operational environments where historical data ex-ist yet observations in the tails of feature distributions remain under-represented. In such cases, TailBooster can enrich the representation of these extreme-value regions, leading to im-proved predictive performance and more robust modelling of operationally critical events. 

5. Discussion 

As mentioned in Section D, synthetic flight records must re-spect the origin–destination airport pairs observed in the his-torical data; however, deep generative models trained on sep-15 Regression Model Prediction of “Air Time (min)” Prediction of “Arrival ∆T (min)” 

Trained on: Trained on: 

Real Naïve Synth. Aug. Synth. Aug. Real Real Naïve Synth. Aug. Synth. Aug. Real 

Random Forest 6.34 19.40 10.34 2.57 12.09 38.89 17.35 4.49 XGBoost 6.75 20.33 10.70 4.29 12.20 36.11 17.84 6.59 CatBoost 6.48 20.14 10.30 6.01 11.54 34.41 14.89 8.29 LightGBM 6.45 19.88 10.21 6.23 12.13 37.22 15.96 10.73 SVR 9.81 23.58 12.23 8.59 17.72 41.23 20.56 15.05 

k-NN 9.88 21.84 11.33 7.89 32.93 47.58 34.00 24.77 Table 8. MAE of regression models trained and tested exclusively on extreme records , for the two target features (lower is better ). 

arate categorical features for “Origin Airport ID” and “Desti-nation Airport ID” may produce combinations absent from the historical record, representing broken relational structure rather than operationally grounded routes. One established solution is the FixedCombinations constraint provided by the SDV li-brary (Patki et al., 2016), which can be used to encode each origin–destination pair as a single route identifier prior to train-ing, thereby reducing two connected features to a single cat-egorical variable that the generative model can learn and re-produce without breaking the origin–destination consistency. The encoding is subsequently reversed after generation, ensur-ing that the synthetic output contains only route combinations observed in the real data. However, collapsing “Origin Airport ID” and “Destination Airport ID” into a single route identifier prevents the generative model from associating operational and temporal features with individual airports. Although air times, taxi times, and depar-ture patterns remain present in the training data, the model sees only the combined route token in place of the two airport iden-tifiers and can therefore no longer learn, for instance, that taxi-out time is characteristic of a specific origin airport or that air time scales with the distance profile of a specific destination. As shown in Figure 6a, this loss of airport-level associative struc-ture caused distributional collapse, leaving broad regions of the operational space unrepresented.    

> (a) With the FixedCombinations
> constraint
> (b) With the relational validity filter
> Figure 6. Operational correlation for real (blue) vs. augmented synthetic (orange) flight records: (a) distributional collapse resulting from the application of the FixedCombinations constraint; (b) uniform coverage achieved by replacing the constraint with the post-generation validity filter (Section D).

We therefore preferred to retain “Origin Airport ID” and “Destination Airport ID” as separate categorical inputs dur-ing generative model training and to enforce route validity through the post-generation rejection step described in Sec-tion D. As shown in Figure 6b, the resulting augmented syn-thetic data covers the operational space far more uniformly, without the distributional collapse artefact introduced by the 

FixedCombinations encoding. Beyond the design considerations discussed above, Tail-Booster carries practical implications for two distinct practi-tioner profiles in air transportation. For organisations with ac-cess to historical flight records, such as airlines, airports, and air navigation service providers, the framework enriches exist-ing datasets by augmenting the under-represented tails of oper-ationally critical features, directly improving the predictability of extreme events such as severe arrival delays and abnormal air times, as evidenced by the MAE reductions reported in Sec-tion 4.5 for the Augmented Real dataset over the Real dataset. For researchers and analysts who lack access to real operational data, TailBooster provides a mechanism for generating high-quality synthetic data that preserves both nominal patterns and extreme-value structure while ensuring operational validity, as demonstrated by the consistent gains of the Augmented Syn-thetic dataset over the Naïve Synthetic across the key evaluation dimensions in Section 4. Although demonstrated here in an aviation context, the framework is transferable to any operational domain where the prediction of extreme values of target numerical features is crit-ical. Unlike the domain-constrained approaches reviewed in Section 2, TailBooster enforces operational validity through a fully data-driven mechanism, learning empirical inter-feature correlations directly from historical records rather than encod-ing them through hand-crafted domain rules, making it applica-ble to any operational setting where such records are available but governing equations or symbolic constraints are not. Finally, the model-agnostic design of the pipeline, in which the TVAE can be substituted with any tabular generative model without modifying any other component, lowers the barrier to adoption and allows practitioners to benefit from future advances in generative modelling without re-engineering the broader framework. From a computational standpoint, the dominant expense in 

TailBooster lies in training the full-data generative model G0 on 16 all 60 ,767 flight records across 10 generative input features, and in the hyperparameter optimisation loop, which ran for 100 tri-als per generative model via the TPE algorithm. Training the extreme-subset models G1 and G2 contributes negligible over-head by comparison, as each operates on a substantially smaller dataset confined to the distributional tails of a single target fea-ture (3 ,726 records for E(1) and 5 ,470 for E(2) ). Similarly, train-ing the autoencoder-based operational cleaning layer is inex-pensive: each autoencoder is fitted on a user-defined subset of operationally correlated features drawn from the real histori-cal data, rather than the full feature set (in the present study, 4 features out of 30), and the trained model can subsequently be reused across an unlimited number of generation runs without retraining. All experiments were conducted on a workstation running Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS, equipped with an AMD Ryzen 9 5950X CPU (16 cores, 32 threads, up to 5.08 GHz), 128 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 GPU (12 GB VRAM). The present study is nonetheless subject to three limitations. First, the evaluation is conducted on a single dataset compris-ing U.S. domestic New York State flights from January 2023, limiting the temporal and geographic coverage; whether the observed improvements generalise across di ff erent seasons, re-gions, and airport network structures remains to be established. Second, the operational validity dimension is assessed visually through pairwise correlation plots rather than through a quanti-tative score, which prevents its incorporation into the hyperpa-rameter optimisation objective and limits comparability across studies; formalising it as a quantitative metric, for instance by defining plausibility bounds derived from aircraft performance envelopes or route-level operational statistics, would address both constraints. Third, the extreme subsets used to train the tail-specific generative models are modest in size (Table 2); a deep generative model trained on few examples has limited diversity in its training signal, which may reduce the variety of synthetic extremes it can produce. This constraint raises a broader question about representativeness: whether the avail-able extreme records are su ffi cient to capture the full spectrum of real-world tail patterns, and at what point the training subset becomes too sparse for reliable extreme synthesis. This con-cern would be more pronounced in operational datasets where extreme events are rarer than in the present study. 

6. Conclusions & Future Work 

This study proposed TailBooster , a dual-layer generative framework, combining statistical and deep learning anomaly detection, designed to address two complementary failure modes of conventional deep generative models applied to mixed-type tabular aviation records: the systematic under-representation of distributional tails and the production of oper-ationally invalid synthetic instances. The framework combined IQR-based extreme subset extraction with dedicated TVAE generative models and autoencoder-based operational cleaning, and was evaluated across five distinct dimensions on publicly available U.S. domestic flight records. The three preservation checks confirmed that the augmenta-tion and cleaning processes did not degrade the qualities already achieved by conventional generation: diversity was maintained across all real clusters, and both statistical similarity and fidelity improved relative to the Naïve Synthetic baseline. The two primary improvement targets were both met. The data-driven operational cleaning layer markedly reduced the proportion of operationally implausible synthetic records relative to conven-tional generation. Targeted extreme-value augmentation con-sistently improved the predictability of extreme events: across six regression models, training on the Augmented Synthetic re-duced MAE by approximately 47–49% on extreme “Air Time (min)” and 29–57% on extreme “Arrival ∆T (min)” relative to training on Naïve Synthetic data, while training on the Aug-mented Real consistently outperformed training on real histori-cal records alone, confirming that the improvements are a prop-erty of the augmented data rather than of any particular predic-tive algorithm. The results demonstrate that TailBooster is beneficial both for practitioners with access to historical flight records, by enriching the representation of extreme-value regions through augmentation of real data with operationally valid synthetic ex-tremes, and for those without such access, by providing aug-mented synthetic data that substantially outperforms conven-tionally generated alternatives. Being fully data-driven and generative-model-agnostic, the framework extends naturally to any domain where extreme-event prediction is operationally critical and domain-specific rules governing operational valid-ity are unavailable. Several directions for future research emerge from these find-ings. Expanding the evaluation to cover multiple months and a wider range of airports and airline operators would address the limitations in temporal and geographic coverage and en-able assessment of whether the framework remains e ff ective under more diverse operational conditions. The framework supports continuous target features extracted via a fixed IQR multiplier; future work could evaluate the sensitivity of re-sults to this threshold and explore its adaptation to features with heavier or more irregular tail behaviour than those ex-amined here, and assess performance across a larger number of target features. Similarly, a sensitivity analysis of the oper-ational cleaning layer with respect to the autoencoder thresh-old p would o ff er practitioners clearer guidance on framework configuration across varied operational contexts. In settings where extreme events are su ffi ciently rare that the extreme subsets E(k) are too small to support e ff ective deep genera-tive model training, it would be worth investigating whether the tail-specific generators G1, . . . , GNtf could be replaced with lightweight resampling methods such as SMOTE or ADASYN. Such a substitution would clarify whether the quality gains of the dual-layer pipeline can be retained while accommodating severe data scarcity in the tails. Finally, in operational set-tings where governing physical equations are at least partially known, the autoencoder-based cleaning layer could potentially be complemented or replaced by a physics-informed mecha-nism, such as a physics-informed neural network, that penalises deviation from known governing equations directly. Such an 17 extension would come at the cost of the framework’s cur-rent transferability—since embedding domain-specific equa-tions would require re-engineering for each new operational setting—trading the generality of the fully data-driven approach for the added precision that known governing laws could pro-vide. 

Code and data Availability 

The code and data used in this study will be made publicly available upon publication at: https: // github.com /karimyehia92 /TailBooster 

References 

Ahmadi, A., Sharif, S., Banad, Y., 2024. A comparative study of sampling methods with cross-validation in the fedhome framework. ArXiv abs /2406.01950. URL: https://api. semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270226221 .Akiba, T., Sano, S., Yanase, T., Ohta, T., Koyama, M., 2019. Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter opti-mization framework, in: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-covery & Data Mining, Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA. pp. 2623–2631. URL: 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330701 , doi: 10. 1145/3292500.3330701 .Allouche, M., Girard, S., Gobet, E., 2022. EV-GAN: Simu-lation of extreme events with ReLU neural networks. Jour-nal of Machine Learning Research 23, 1–39. URL: https: //jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-0663.html .Aly, K., Sharpanskykh, A., 2025. Synthetic flight data generation using generative models, in: 2025 Integrated Communications, Navigation and Surveillance Conference (ICNS), IEEE, Brussels, Belgium. pp. 1–10. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10976960 , doi: 10. 1109/ICNS65417.2025.10976960 .Aly, K., Sharpanskykh, A., Hoekstra, J., 2026. Gen-erative augmentation of imbalanced flight records for flight diversion prediction: A multi-objective optimisa-tion framework. Aerospace Science and Technology 178, 113224. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast. 2026.113224 , doi: 10.1016/j.ast.2026.113224 .Azimi, A., Boboeva, B., Varshavskiy, I., Khalilbekov, S., Niza-mitdinov, A., Noyoftova, N., Shulgin, S., 2024. zGAN: An outlier-focused generative adversarial network for realistic synthetic data generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20808 URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20808 .Balkema, A.A., de Haan, L., 1974. Residual life time at great age. The Annals of Probability 2, 792–804. URL: https:// doi.org/10.1214/aop/1176996548 , doi: 10.1214/aop/ 1176996548 .Bassetti, S., Hutchinson, B., Tebaldi, C., Kravitz, B., 2024. Di ff ESM: Conditional emulation of temperature and pre-cipitation in earth system models with 3D di ff usion mod-els. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 16, e2023MS004194. URL: https://doi.org/10.1029/ 2023MS004194 , doi: 10.1029/2023MS004194 .Bergstra, J., Bardenet, R., Bengio, Y., Kégl, B., 2011. Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimiza-tion. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems 24. URL: https://proceedings. neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2011/file/ 86e8f7ab32cfd12577bc2619bc635690-Paper.pdf .Bhatia, S., Jain, A., Hooi, B., 2021. ExGAN: Adversarial generation of extreme samples, in: Proceedings of the 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI Press. pp. 6750–6758. URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ AAAI/article/view/16834 .Boulaguiem, Y., Zscheischler, J., Vignotto, E., van der Wiel, K., Engelke, S., 2022. Modeling and simulating spatial extremes by combining extreme value theory with gener-ative adversarial networks. Environmental Data Science 1, e5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1017/eds.2022.4 ,doi: 10.1017/eds.2022.4 .Breiman, L., 2001. Random forests. Machine learning 45, 5– 32. Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 2023. Transtats database for airline on-time performance. URL: https:// transtats.bts.gov/Tables.asp . accessed: 2025-01-23. Chen, T., Guestrin, C., 2016. XGBoost: A scalable tree boost-ing system, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD In-ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ACM. pp. 785–794. doi: 10.1145/2939672. 2939785 .Coles, S., 2001. An Introduction to Statistical Mod-eling of Extreme Values. Springer Series in Statis-tics, Springer, London. URL: https://link. springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4471-3675-0 ,doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-3675-0 .Cook, A., Tanner, G., 2015. European Airline De-lay Cost Reference Values. Technical Report Version 4.1. EUROCONTROL. Brussels. URL: 

https://www.eurocontrol.int/publication/ european-airline-delay-cost-reference-values .Cover, T.M., Hart, P.E., 1967. Nearest neighbor pattern classifi-cation. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 13, 21–27. doi: 10.1109/TIT.1967.1053964 .de Haan, L., Ferreira, A., 2006. Extreme Value Theory: An Introduction. volume 3 of Springer Series in Opera-tions Research and Financial Engineering . Springer, New York. URL: https://link.springer.com/book/10. 1007/0-387-34471-3 , doi: 10.1007/0-387-34471-3 .18 Drucker, H., Burges, C.J.C., Kaufman, L., Smola, A., Vapnik, V., 1997. Support vector regression machines, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 9, MIT Press. pp. 155–161. Embrechts, P., Klüppelberg, C., Mikosch, T., 1997. Modelling Extremal Events for Insurance and Fi-nance. volume 33 of Applications of Mathemat-ics . Springer, Berlin. URL: https://link. springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-642-33483-2 ,doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-33483-2 .Ferreira, A., de Haan, L., 2015. On the block maxima method in extreme value theory: PWM estimators. The Annals of Statistics 43, 276–298. URL: https://doi.org/10. 1214/14-AOS1280 , doi: 10.1214/14-AOS1280 .Girard, S., Gobet, E., Pachebat, J., 2025. HTGAN: Heavy-tail GAN for multivariate dependent extremes via latent-dimensional control. International Journal of Computer Mathematics , 1–41URL: https://doi. org/10.1080/00207160.2025.2578391 , doi: 10.1080/ 00207160.2025.2578391 . published online 11 November 2025. Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., Bengio, Y., 2014. Generative adversarial nets, in: Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates, Inc.. pp. 2672–2680. URL: https://proceedings. neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2014/file/ 5ca3e9b122f61f8f06494c97b1afccf3-Paper.pdf .Gu, J., Zhang, X., Wang, G., 2025. Beyond the norm: A survey of synthetic data generation for rare events. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06380 URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506. 06380 .Hinton, G.E., Salakhutdinov, R.R., 2006. Reducing the dimen-sionality of data with neural networks. Science 313, 504– 507. doi: 10.1126/science.1127647 .Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P., 2020. Denoising di ff usion probabilistic models, in: Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M., Lin, H. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates, Inc.. pp. 6840–6851. URL: https://proceedings. neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/ 4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Paper.pdf .Huster, T., Cohen, J.E.J., Lin, Z., Chan, K., Kamhoua, C., Leslie, N., Chiang, C.Y.J., Sekar, V., 2021. Pareto GAN: Ex-tending the representational power of GANs to heavy-tailed distributions, in: Proceedings of the 38th International Con-ference on Machine Learning (ICML), PMLR. pp. 4523– 4532. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/ huster21a.html .Jiang, M., Liang, Y., Han, S., Ma, K., Chen, Y., Xu, Z., 2024. Leveraging generative adversarial networks for ad-dressing data imbalance in financial market supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15222 URL: https://arxiv. org/abs/2412.15222 .Karimanzira, D., 2024. Mass conservative time-series GAN for synthetic extreme flood-event generation: Im-pact on probabilistic forecasting models. Stats 7, 808– 826. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/stats7030049 ,doi: 10.3390/stats7030049 .Ke, G., Meng, Q., Finley, T., Wang, T., Chen, W., Ma, W., Ye, Q., Liu, T.Y., 2017. LightGBM: A highly e ffi cient gradi-ent boosting decision tree, in: Proceedings of the 31st Inter-national Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems, Curran Associates, Inc.. pp. 3149–3157. URL: https: //dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3294996.3295074 .Khorram, S., Jiang, M., Shahbazi, M., Danesh, M.H., Fuxin, L., 2024. Taming the tail in class-conditional GANs: Knowl-edge sharing via unconditional training at lower resolutions, in: 2024 IEEE /CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7580–7590. doi: 10.1109/ CVPR52733.2024.00724 .Kingma, D.P., Welling, M., 2013. Auto-encoding variational bayes. 2nd International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR 2014). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1312.6114 .Knoblauch, J., Vomfell, L., 2020. Robust bayesian inference for discrete outcomes with the total variation distance. ArXiv abs /2010.13456. URL: https://api.semanticscholar. org/CorpusID:225066970 .Kotelnikov, A., Baranchuk, D., Rubachev, I., Babenko, A., 2023. TabDDPM: Modelling tabular data with di ff usion models, in: Proceedings of the 40th International Confer-ence on Machine Learning (ICML), PMLR. pp. 17564– 17579. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/ kotelnikov23a.html .Lafon, N., Naveau, P., Fablet, R., 2023. A VAE ap-proach to sample multivariate extremes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.10987 URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306. 10987 .Leadbetter, M.R., 1991. On a basis for ‘Peaks over Thresh-old’ modelling. Statistics & Probability Letters 12, 357– 362. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-7152(91) 90107-3 , doi: 10.1016/0167-7152(91)90107-3 .Li, Y., Li, P., Yang, T., Chen, Z., Song, X., Zhao, Y., Liu, J., Feng, W., 2023. A C-DCGAN-based method for generating extreme risk scenarios of high percentage new energy sys-tems, in: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Power and Systems (ICIPS), IEEE. pp. 588–593. doi: 10.1109/ICIPS59254.2023.10405272 .van der Maaten, L., Hinton, G., 2008. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Machine Learning Research 9, 2579–2605. URL: http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/ vandermaaten08a.html .19 Mas-Pujol, S., Delgado, L., 2024. Prediction of atfm impact for individual flights: A machine learning approach. Expert Systems with Applications 252, 124146. URL: https://www.sciencedirect. com/science/article/pii/S0957417424010121 ,doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2024.124146 .Park, N., Mohammadi, M., Gorde, K., Jajodia, S., Park, H., Kim, Y., 2018. Data synthesis based on generative adver-sarial networks. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 11, 1071–1083. doi: 10.14778/3231751.3231757 .Patki, N., Wedge, R., Veeramachaneni, K., 2016. The syn-thetic data vault, in: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), pp. 399– 410. doi: 10.1109/DSAA.2016.49 .Peard, A., Hall, J.W., 2023. Combining deep generative models with extreme value theory for synthetic hazard simulation: A multivariate and spatially coherent approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18521 URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311. 18521 .Pickands, J., 1975. Statistical inference using extreme or-der statistics. The Annals of Statistics 3, 119–131. URL: 

https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1176343003 , doi: 10. 1214/aos/1176343003 .Platzer, M., Reutterer, T., 2021. Holdout-based empirical as-sessment of mixed-type synthetic data. Frontiers in Big Data 4, 679939. doi: 10.3389/fdata.2021.679939 .Prokhorenkova, L., Gusev, G., Vorobev, A., Doro-gush, A.V., Gulin, A., 2018. CatBoost: Unbiased boosting with categorical features, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, Cur-ran Associates, Inc.. pp. 6639–6649. URL: https: //proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/ 14491b756b3a51daac41c24863285549-Abstract. html .Ruocco, M., et al., 2025. D2.2 Definition of Use Cases. Techni-cal Report Edition 00.01.00. SynthAIr Consortium / SESAR 3 Joint Undertaking. URL: https://cordis.europa.eu/ project/id/101114847/results . grant No. 101114847, HORIZON-SESAR-2022-DES-ER-01. Sakurada, M., Yairi, T., 2014. Anomaly detection using au-toencoders with nonlinear dimensionality reduction, in: Pro-ceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Machine Learning for Sen-sory Data Analysis (MLSDA 2014), pp. 4–11. doi: 10.1145/ 2689746.2689747 .SDMetrics Developers, 2023a. Contingencysimilarity. URL: https://docs.sdv.dev/sdmetrics/metrics/ metrics-glossary/contingencysimilarity . ac-cessed: 2025-02-03. SDMetrics Developers, 2023b. Correlationsimilarity. URL: https://docs.sdv.dev/sdmetrics/metrics/ metrics-glossary/correlationsimilarity . ac-cessed: 2025-02-03. Shen, Y., Sudjianto, A., ArunPrakash, R., Bhattacharyya, A., Rao, M., Wang, Y., Vaughan, J., Zhou, N., 2024. Towards a framework on tabular synthetic data generation: a mini-malist approach: theory, use cases, and limitations. ArXiv abs /2411.10982. URL: https://api.semanticscholar. org/CorpusID:274131324 .Sokolova, M., Lapalme, G., 2009. A systematic analysis of performance measures for classification tasks. Information processing & management 45, 427–437. Tukey, J.W., 1977. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. U.S. Department of Transportation, . Bureau of transportation statistics. URL: https://www.bts.gov/ . accessed: 2025-09-17. Viehmann, T., 2021. Numerically more stable computation of the p-values for the two-sample kolmogorov-smirnov test. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.08037 . Wold, S., Esbensen, K., Geladi, P., 1987. Principal component analysis. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 2, 37–52. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/0169743987800849 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/0169-7439(87)80084-9 .Xiao, Z., Kreis, K., Vahdat, A., 2021. Tackling the genera-tive learning trilemma with denoising di ff usion gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07804 [cs] URL: https://arxiv. org/abs/2112.07804 .Xu, L., Skoularidou, M., Cuesta-Infante, A., Veeramacha-neni, K., 2019. Modeling tabular data using conditional gan, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems, pp. 7333–7343. URL: https://proceedings. neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/ 254ed7d2de3b23ab10936522dd547b78-Paper.pdf .Yi, D., Yu, M., Wang, Q., Tian, H., Wang, L., Yan, Y., Wu, C., Hu, B., Li, C., 2024. Method for wind–solar–load ex-treme scenario generation based on an improved InfoGAN. Applied Sciences 14, 9163. URL: https://doi.org/10. 3390/app14209163 , doi: 10.3390/app14209163 .20